=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims 
Using Basic T echniques
Jacqueline Friedland, FCAS, FCIA, MAAA, FCA
KPMG LLP
With significant contributions by Rachel Dutil, FCAS, FCIA and Edward Lam, FCAS
KPMG LLP
Casualty
Actuarial
Society
Version 3, July 30, 2010
© Casualty Actuarial Society, 2010

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
 

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
ESTIMATING UNPAID CLAIMS USING  
BASIC TECHNIQUES 
 
 
Jacqueline Friedland, FCAS, FCIA, MAAA, FCA 
KPMG LLP 
 
With significant contributions by 
Rachel Dutil, FCAS, FCIA and Edward Lam, FCAS 
KPMG LLP 
 
 
July 30 2010 

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
 

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
  
 
i 
Acknowledgments 
 
 
It has been a true honor and privilege to prepare this new text titled Estimating Unpaid Claims 
Using Basic Techniques for the Casualty Actuarial Society (CAS). Special thanks go to my 
KPMG colleagues Rachel Dutil and Edward Lam. Rachel read, proofed, critiqued, modified, and 
ultimately improved each and every draft version of this text. Her contributions were tremendous 
at every step of the process. Edward Lam prepared all of the supporting exhibits and assisted with 
much of the research required for the text. He also reviewed most, if not all, of the draft versions. 
This text could not have been completed in such a timely manner without their invaluable input. 
 
I also want to thank my KPMG colleagues in Toronto and the United States who assisted in 
reviewing various versions of the text. Each member of the KPMG Toronto Actuarial Practice 
was involved at one point or another in reviewing this text. Thanks to members of the CAS Task 
Force for their input and feedback. Finally, I want to acknowledge the significant contributions of 
Ralph Blanchard, Edward Y. Yao, Wynand Viljoen, and Eugene van der Westhuizen. Their 
international experience and knowledge was particularly valuable in ensuring that the text will 
have relevance for actuaries practicing throughout the world. 
 
The objective of the CAS in creating a new text that addressed the estimation of unpaid claims 
was to replace a number of readings that existed on the syllabus of basic education as of 2007 
with a single educational publication. Thus, candidates preparing for the actuarial exam 
addressing the estimation of unpaid claims using basic techniques would be able to replace 
numerous papers, which were written over a 30-year period, with a single text. Two major 
benefits of one educational publication are (1) consistent definitions of terms and (2) examples 
that are used with multiple estimation techniques. The CAS specified that the new text would 
focus on the learning objectives contained within the syllabus as of spring 2007. Furthermore, the 
CAS specifically requested that the new educational publication be written in a way as to be 
valuable to actuaries operating around the world. 
 
In preparing Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques
, I relied extensively on the 
following papers: 
 
Adler, M.; and Kline, C.D. Jr., “Evaluating Bodily Injury Liabilities Using a Claims Closure 
Model,” Evaluating Insurance Company Liabilities, Casualty Actuarial Society Discussion Paper 
Program, 1988, pp. 1-66. 
 
Berquist, J.R.; and Sherman, R.E., “Loss Reserve Adequacy Testing: A Comprehensive, 
Systematic Approach,” Proceedings of the Casualty Actuarial Society (PCAS) LXIV, 1977, pp. 
123-184. Including discussion of paper: Thorne, J.O., PCAS LXV, 1978, pp. 10-33. 
 
Bornhuetter, R.L.; and Ferguson, R.E., “The Actuary and IBNR,” PCAS LIX, 1972, pp. 181-195. 
Including discussions of paper: Cooper, W.P., PCAS LX, 1973, pp. 161-164; and White, H.G., 
PCAS LX 1973, pp. 165-168. 
 
Casualty Actuarial Society, Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss and 
Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, May 1988. 
 

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
  
 
ii 
Fisher, W.H.; and Lange, J.T., “Loss Reserve Testing: A Report Year Approach,” PCAS LX, 
1973, pp. 189-207. Including discussions of paper: Skurnick, D., PCAS LXI, 1974, pp. 73-83; and 
authors’ response, PCAS LXI, 1974, pp. 84-85. 
 
Fisher, W.H.; and Lester, E.P., “Loss Reserve Testing in a Changing Environment,” PCAS LXII, 
1975, pp. 154-171. 
 
Mack, T. “Credible Claims Reserve: The Benktander Method,” ASTIN Bulletin, 2000, pp. 333-
337. 
 
Pinto, E.; and Gogol, D.F., “An Analysis of Excess Loss Development,” PCAS LXXIV, 1987, pp. 
227-255. Including discussions of paper: Levine, G.M., PCAS LXXIV, 1987, pp. 256-271; and 
Bear, R.A., PCAS LXXIX, 1992, pp. 134-148. 
 
Wiser, R.F.; Cockley, J.E; and Gardner A., “Loss Reserving,” Foundations of Casualty Actuarial 
Science (Fourth Edition), Casualty Actuarial Society, 2001, Chapter 5, pp. 197-285. 
 
Throughout this text, I typically refer to these papers and other actuarial papers by the author, 
publication source, and year of publication. 
 
It is important to recognize that learning objectives can change over time. To the extent that the 
CAS determines that new or different topics are appropriate for actuarial candidates studying 
basic estimation techniques for unpaid claims, it is anticipated that this text will need to be 
modified accordingly. 
 
I have a request of readers of this text. Every effort has been made to ensure that all references 
and calculations are accurate. If we have inadvertently missed something, please contact me or 
the CAS so that future editions of the text can be corrected. 

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
  
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
PART 1 – INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter 1 – Overview ............................................................................................................  4 
 
Chapter 2 – The Claims Process ............................................................................................  17 
 
 
PART 2 – INFORMATION GATHERING 
 
Introduction to Part 2 – Information Gathering .....................................................................  27 
 
Chapter 3 – Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims ....  28 
 
Chapter 4 – Meeting with Management ................................................................................  44 
 
Chapter 5 – The Development Triangle ................................................................................  51 
 
Chapter 6 – The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool ..............................................  63 
 
 
PART 3 – BASIC TECHNIQUES FOR ESTIMATING UNPAID 
CLAIMS 
 
Introduction to Part 3 – Basic Techniques for Estimating Unpaid Claims ............................  79 
 
Chapter 7 – Development Technique ....................................................................................  84 
 
Chapter 8 – Expected Claims Technique ..............................................................................  131 
 
Chapter 9 – Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique ......................................................................  152 
 
Chapter 10 – Cape Cod Technique ........................................................................................  174 
 
Chapter 11 – Frequency-Severity Techniques .......................................................................  194 
 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique .....................................................  265  
 
Chapter 13 – Berquist-Sherman Techniques .........................................................................  283 
 
Chapter 14 – Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance ..................................  329 
 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques ................................................................................  345 
1

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
  
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
 
 
PART 4 – ESTIMATING UNPAID CLAIM ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES 
 
Introduction to Part 4 – Estimating Unpaid Claim Adjustment Expenses ............................  369 
 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses ............................  370 
 
Chapter 17 – Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses ......................... 386 
 
 
APPENDICES – STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES AND ACTUARIAL 
STANDARDS OF PRACTICE 
 
Appendix A – Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss 
and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves ...............................................................................  419 
 
Appendix B – Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 43 Property/Casualty Unpaid 
Claim Estimates .....................................................................................................................  429 
 
Appendix C – Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 9 Documentation and Disclosure  
in Property and Casualty Insurance Ratemaking, Loss Reserving, and Valuations ..............  440 
 
 
 
 
2

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
  
 
 
PART 1 – INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Chapter 1 – Overview ............................................................................................................  4 
 
Chapter 2 – The Claims Process ............................................................................................  17 
 
 
3

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 – OVERVIEW 
 
 
Importance of Accurately Estimating Unpaid Claims 
 
Accuracy in estimating unpaid claims is critical to insurers. Unlike manufacturers, insurers may 
not know the true cost of goods sold during a financial reporting period until several years later. 
An insurer sells its promise to pay the policyholder or an injured party on behalf of the 
policyholder in the event of an occurrence covered by the insurance policy. For some insured 
events, the insurer is able to quantify the exact costs of settlement quickly and with great 
precision. For other insured events, the insurer may not know the ultimate cost for years, and 
possibly decades. Nevertheless, the insurer must report its financial results on a regular basis. 
Claim reserves (also known as technical provisions in some parts of the world) represent the 
insurer’s estimate of its current liabilities for claims that occurred on or prior to the financial 
statement reporting date but that have not yet been paid. Actuaries around the world work with 
insurers and self-insurers to quantify, evaluate, and monitor estimates of unpaid claims. 
 
We can look at the importance of accurately estimating unpaid claims from three viewpoints: 
 
 Internal management  
 Investors 
 Regulators 
 
 
Internal Management 
 
From an internal management perspective, accuracy in the estimation of unpaid claims is 
essential for proper decision-making in virtually every area of an insurance company’s operations 
including, but not limited to, pricing, underwriting, strategic, and financial decisions. An accurate 
estimate of unpaid claims is particularly important in pricing insurance products as inaccurate 
estimates could threaten the financial condition of an insurer. For example, an inadequate 
estimate of unpaid claims could drive an insurer to reduce its rates not realizing that the estimated 
unpaid claims were insufficient to cover historical claims. In this situation, the new lower rates 
would likely be insufficient to pay the claims that will arise from the new policies. The problem 
could be exacerbated if the insurer gains market share as a result of the lower rates, which 
ultimately would prove to be inadequate to cover future claims. This chain of events could 
eventually lead to a situation where the future solvency of the insurer is at risk.  
 
We can also envision the reverse situation where an excessive estimate of unpaid claims could be 
a factor in inappropriate pricing decisions that could put the future financial condition of the 
insurer at risk. A redundant estimate of unpaid claims may drive an insurer to increase rates 
unnecessarily. The increased rates could lead to loss of market share, resulting in a loss of 
premium revenue to the insurer. A significant loss of revenue could negatively impact the 
financial strength of the insurer. 
 
An inaccurate estimate of unpaid claims can also lead to poor underwriting, strategic, and 
financial decisions. Financial results often influence an insurer’s decision-making process 
regarding where to increase business and whether to exit a market that is underperforming. If the 
financial results are misstated due to an excessive estimate of unpaid claims, an insurer may 
inappropriately choose to exit a particular line of business or region; such a decision could 
4

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
ultimately have a negative impact on the organization’s future financial strength. In addition, an 
inaccurate estimate of unpaid claims can have a negative impact on the insurer’s decisions 
regarding its reinsurance needs as well as its claims management procedures and policies. Finally, 
the accuracy of the unpaid claims estimate is also important for financial decision-making such as 
capital management, i.e., which lines of business get a larger proportion of allocated capital. 
 
 
Investors 
 
From the investors’ perspective, accuracy in reserves is also essential to the decision-making 
process. Inaccurate reserves may lead to misstated balance sheets and income statements for the 
insurer. If reserves are incorrect, key financial metrics used by investors could be misleading. An 
insurer with insufficient reserves may present itself in a stronger position than it truly is. 
Conversely, an insurer with excessive reserves may show a weaker position than its true state. 
This could affect investors’ decisions related to the insurer. 
 
 
Regulators 
 
Finally, insurance regulators rely on the financial statements of an insurer to carry out their 
supervisory role. Inaccurate reserves could result in a misstatement of the true financial position 
of an insurer. If a financially struggling insurer is masking its true state with inadequate reserves, 
a regulator may not become involved until too late in the process to help the insurer regain its 
strength.  
 
 
Further Requirements for Accurate Reserves 
 
State Law 
 
Proper estimating of unpaid claims is more than just a necessity for managing, investing in, and 
regulating insurers – it is required by law. As early as the 1960s, the New York insurance law 
specified: 
 
… every insurer shall maintain reserves in an amount estimated in the aggregate to 
provide for the payment of all losses or claims incurred on or prior to the date of 
settlement whether reported or unreported which are unpaid as of such date and for 
which such insurer may be liable, and also reserves in an amount estimated to provide 
for the expenses of adjustments or settlement of such claims.   
 
Today, many jurisdictions directly tie the legal requirements for accurate estimation of unpaid 
claims to the responsibilities of the actuary. The role of the Appointed Actuary has been created 
through insurance legislation in countries around the world. 
 
5

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)1 
 
In the mid-1970s, due to the increasingly litigious environment in the U.S. and in reaction to the 
insolvencies of a number of property and casualty2 (P&C) insurance companies, many of which 
involved inadequate claim reserves, the NAIC recommended that companies include claim 
reserve opinions (originally called certification of loss reserves) with their annual statements. The 
first opinion requirements emanated in 1980 from a limited number of state regulations. 
 
In 1990, the NAIC began requiring that most P&C insurers in the U.S. obtain a Statement of 
Actuarial Opinion signed by a qualified actuary. The statement contains the qualified actuary’s 
opinion regarding the reasonableness of the carried statutory loss and loss adjustment expense 
(LAE) reserves as shown in the statutory annual statement. In 1993, qualified actuaries signing 
statements of opinion started using the title of Appointed Actuary because the NAIC required that 
they must be appointed by the Board of Directors or its equivalent. 
 
 
Other U.S.-Regulated Entities 
 
Other U.S. non-NAIC regulated entities also require actuarial opinions. For example, many state 
insurance departments require opinions for captive insurers, self-insurers, and self-insurance 
pools as well as some underwriting pools and associations.3 
 
 
Canada 
 
In Canada, the Insurance Companies Act requires all federally regulated insurers to have an 
Appointed Actuary. The first responsibility of the Appointed Actuary, as set out in the Insurance 
Companies Act, is to value the actuarial and other policy liabilities of the company at the end of a 
financial year. The Appointed Actuary’s valuation must be in accordance with generally accepted 
actuarial practice, which means complying with the rules and the standards set by the Canadian 
Institute of Actuaries (CIA). Further responsibilities, including the specific requirements of the 
Appointed Actuary’s report on policy liabilities, are set forth by the Office of the Superintendent 
of Financial Institutions Canada (OSFI). Most provinces have adopted legislation similar to the 
federal insurance act, which defines the major responsibilities of the Appointed Actuary; thus, 
most provincial insurers also have an Appointed Actuary. 
 
 
                                                 
1 As the organization of insurance regulators from the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the five 
territories, the NAIC promotes the development of uniform policy when uniformity is appropriate. State 
insurance regulators created the NAIC in 1871 to address the need to coordinate the regulation of multi-
state insurers. 
 
2 Property and casualty insurance is a term used most frequently in the U.S. and Canada; the terms non-life 
and general insurance are often used in other countries. 
 
3 There are many different types of captive insurers operating around the world. Generally, a captive is a 
limited purpose, licensed insurance company, the main business purpose of which is to insure or reinsure 
the risks of the captive’s owners. Self-insurance describes a wide range of risk financing arrangements 
through which organizations pay all or a significant portion of their own losses. Underwriting pools and 
associations are created in some jurisdictions to provide coverage for specific exposures, such as residual 
market automobile or aviation, across the insurance industry. 
6

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
Other Examples – Australia and Slovenia 
 
We offer two additional examples of countries that have enacted insurance legislation that 
requires an actuary to be involved in the process of developing unpaid claim estimates. Insurance 
legislation in Australia requires insurance companies to have an Appointed Actuary. According to 
the Amendment of the Insurance Act (1973), the signed actuary’s report must contain a statement 
of the actuary’s opinion about each of the following: 
 
 The adequacy of all or part of the amount specified in the general insurer’s accounts in 
respect of its liabilities, and the amount that the actuary considers would be adequate in the 
circumstances 
 
 The accuracy of any relevant valuations made by the actuary 
 
 The assumptions used by the actuary in making those valuations 
 
 The relevance, appropriateness, and accuracy of the information on which those valuations 
were based 
 
 Any other matter in respect of which the prudential standards require a statement of the 
actuary’s opinion to be included in the report 
 
The Insurance Act of Slovenia specifies that every company that is authorized to perform 
insurance operations is obliged to appoint a certified actuary. The insurance legislation defines 
the tasks of the certified actuary as follows: 
 
A certified actuary shall be obliged to examine whether premiums are calculated and 
technical provisions set aside in accordance with the regulations, and whether they are 
calculated or set aside so as to ensure the long-term meeting of all the insurance 
underwriting’s obligations arising from the insurance contracts. … A certified actuary 
shall be obliged to submit to the supervisory boards and boards of directors, together 
with the opinion on the annual report, a report on the findings of the certified actuary 
with regard to the supervision carried out in the preceding year pursuant to the first 
paragraph hereunder. The said report must, in particular, include the reasons for issuing 
a favorable opinion, an opinion with a reservation or an unfavorable opinion of a 
certified actuary on the annual statements. 
 
These examples demonstrate the important role of actuaries in determining and opining on claim 
reserves for insurers around the world. 
 
 
Organization of This Book 
 
This book focuses solely on the estimation of unpaid claims for P&C insurers, reinsurers, and 
self-insured entities. It is an introduction to the topic for actuarial candidates who should only 
consider this text as the beginning of their learning. There is a vast array of literature on the 
estimation of unpaid claims available throughout the international actuarial community. We direct 
actuaries who want to expand their knowledge of the topic beyond the scope of this text to:  
 
7

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
 Casualty Actuarial Society (CAS) seminars such as the Reserve Variability Limited 
Attendance Seminar and the Casualty Loss Reserve Seminar 
 
 CAS publications including the Proceedings of the Casualty Actuarial Society (PCAS), 
Forum, Discussion Paper Program, and Variance  
 
 International actuarial organizations such as The Institute of Actuaries of Australia and The 
Institute of Actuaries / The Faculty of Actuaries (UK) 
 
We organize this book in the following four parts: 
 
 Part 1 – Introduction 
 Part 2 – Information Gathering 
 Part 3 – Basic Techniques for Estimating Unpaid Claims 
 Part 4 – Estimating Unpaid Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
We also include three appendices following Part 4 that contain the CAS Statement of Principles 
and specific actuarial Standards of Practice promulgated by the American Academy of Actuaries 
(Academy), which are related to unpaid claim estimate analysis. 
 
In Part 1, we take a detailed look at the process for estimating unpaid claims from the perspective 
of the claims department. We follow a claim from its first report to the insurer, through the 
establishment of an initial case outstanding, to partial payments and changes in the case 
outstanding, and finally to ultimate claim settlement.  
 
We dedicate Part 2 to the topic of information gathering. Before actuaries can delve into 
quantitative analysis of unpaid claims, they must gather information. This information includes 
detailed statistics summarizing the historical claims and exposure experience of the insurer as 
well as a thorough knowledge of the insurer’s environment. We describe the types of data 
actuaries use and methods for organizing the data. We discuss the importance of meetings with 
those involved in the claims and underwriting processes and provide extensive details of the types 
of information the actuary should seek from such meetings. The development triangle is one of 
the most common tools used by actuaries to evaluate the performance of an insurer and to 
determine estimates of unpaid claims. In Part 2, Chapter 5, we describe how to create and use 
development triangles.  
 
In Part 3, we explore basic techniques for estimating unpaid claims. We generally rely on examples 
based on the actual experience of insurers in the U.S. and Canada. (See further description 
regarding examples later in this chapter.) We use similar portfolios of insurance in successive 
chapters to allow a comparison of the results from different techniques. A changing environment, 
such as an increase in claim ratios, a shift in the strength of case outstanding, and a change in 
product mix, can have a pronounced effect on the accuracy of the estimation technique. In this part, 
we demonstrate through detailed examples the impact of various changes on each of the 
methodologies for estimating unpaid claims. We conclude Part 3 with an evaluation of all the 
methods presented in the previous chapters. In the final chapter for this part, we also discuss on-
going monitoring of unpaid claim estimates. 
 
The purpose of Part 4 is to present techniques for estimating unpaid claim adjustment expenses. 
Claim adjustment expenses are the costs of administering, determining coverage for, settling, or 
defending claims even if it is ultimately determined that the claim is invalid. Some claims 
8

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
produce very little adjustment expenses; an example of such a claim is a house fire that is settled 
with only a few phone calls. Other claims, such as an asbestos claim, may revolve around 
complex legal and medical issues and may involve many interested parties. Claim adjustment 
expenses for an asbestos claim often involve litigation which can lead to high defense costs and 
expert fees and thus, very high expenses. In some cases, the claim adjustment expenses for 
asbestos claims may be significantly greater than the indemnity payment itself. 
 
Historically, insurers categorized claim adjustment expenses as allocated loss adjustment 
expenses (ALAE) and unallocated loss adjustment expenses (ULAE).
4 ALAE correspond to those 
costs the insurer is able to assign to a particular claim, such as legal and expert witness expenses 
– thus, the name allocated loss adjustment expense. ULAE, on the other hand, is not easily 
allocated to a specific claim. Examples of ULAE include the payroll, rent, and computer expenses 
for the claims department of an insurer.  
 
While actuaries in Canada still separate claim adjustment expenses into ALAE and ULAE, the 
NAIC promulgated two new categorizations of adjustment expenses (effective January 1, 1998) 
for U.S. insurers reporting on Schedule P
5 of the P&C statutory Annual Statement: defense and 
cost containment (DCC) and adjusting and other (A&O). Generally, DCC expenses include all 
defense litigation and medical cost containment expenses regardless of whether internal or 
external to the insurer; A&O expenses include all claims adjusting expenses, whether internal or 
external to the insurer.  
 
The material in the appendices addresses some of the key professional obligations of U.S. and 
Canadian actuaries that are related to the estimation of unpaid claims as promulgated by the CAS 
and the Academy. The CAS Code of Professional Conduct states: 
 
It is the professional responsibility of an Actuary to observe applicable standards 
of practice that have been promulgated by a Recognized Actuarial Organization 
for the jurisdictions in which the Actuary renders Actuarial Services and to keep 
current regarding changes in these standards. 
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) is a U.S. actuarial organization associated with the 
Academy that promulgates the standards of practice for the U.S. actuarial profession.  
Because the Academy is a “Recognized Actuarial Organization” and it issues standards of 
practice with respect to actuarial practice in the U.S., CAS members are required to observe the 
Academy’s standard if they practice in the U.S. The controlling jurisdiction is the one in which 
the actuary renders the actuarial services. Therefore, CAS members who do not practice in the 
U.S. are not required to observe the Academy’s standards but would instead be required to 
observe the standards set by any other recognized actuarial organization for the jurisdiction in 
which they practice (e.g., the CIA in Canada or the Institute/Faculty of Actuaries in the United 
Kingdom). The requirements for most of these organizations come in the form of standards of 
practice, educational notes, statements of principles, and other professional guidelines. In the 
                                                 
4 In Canada, ULAE is also referred to as internal loss adjustment expense (ILAE). 
 
5 Schedule P is an important section of the U.S. P&C statutory Annual  Statement. In his paper 
“Completing and Using Schedule P,” (CAS Forum, 2002) Sholom Feldblum states: “Schedule P is the 
actuarial portion of the Annual Statement and is critical to monitoring the solvency of insurers.” Schedule P 
includes a ten-year summary, by line of insurance, of earned premiums, claim and claim expense payments, 
and unpaid claims and expenses; it also contains claim development schedules (also by line of insurance) 
for incurred net claims, paid net claims, and net bulk and incurred but not reported (IBNR) reserves. 
9

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
appendices to this book, we provide, in their entirety, selected CAS and Academy documents 
related to the estimation of unpaid claims.  
 
 
Ranges of Unpaid Claim Estimates 
 
Throughout the book, we focus on obtaining point estimates for unpaid claims and claim-related 
expenses. We demonstrate the potential difficulty in obtaining one single estimate of the claims 
liability through numerous examples applied to the same line of business for the same experience 
period. Each of the methods presented results in a different value of the unpaid claim estimate. 
Furthermore, we recognize that, to the extent that we are dealing with the estimation of the mean 
of a stochastic process, the actual unpaid claims will almost always differ from the estimate. 
 
Clearly, a range of estimates of the unpaid and a statement of our confidence that the actual 
unpaid claims (as proven at final development) will be within the stated range are valuable to 
management, regulators, policyholders, investors, and even the general public. However, the 
insurer’s balance sheet requires the insurer to record a point estimate of the unpaid claims.
6 
 
Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 43 (ASOP 43) adopted in June 2007 by the ASB defines the 
actuarial central estimate as an estimate that represents an expected value over the range of 
reasonably possible outcomes. It is beyond the scope of this book to address ranges of unpaid 
claim estimates. We refer the reader to the wealth of material published by the CAS and various 
other international actuarial organizations on the subject of ranges for unpaid claim estimates. 
 
 
Background Regarding the Examples 
 
Differences in Coverages and Lines of Business Around the World 
 
There are significant differences in the types of P&C insurance offered around the world. There 
are also differences in the names that are used for similar coverages throughout the world. For 
example, in the U.S. and Canada, insurers use the name “automobile insurance” to refer to the 
P&C coverage for automobiles and trucks; insurers from the U.K. call this coverage “motor 
insurance”; insurers conducting business in India refer to this coverage as “car insurance”; and in 
South Africa, insurers use both “car insurance” and “motor insurance.” Similarly, the name of the 
coverage protecting personal homes and possessions is “homeowners insurance” in the U.S. and 
Canada, “home insurance” in India, and “home insurance” or “homeowners insurance” in 
Australia. In South Africa, some insurers differentiate between “household content” and 
“household building” insurance.  
 
Some of the major coverages for U.S. P&C insurers, such as workers compensation or medical 
malpractice, may not exist at all in other countries, or if they exist, they may operate in a very 
different way. For example, in Canada, workers compensation insurance is not categorized as a 
P&C insurance coverage and is not sold by insurers. Instead, Canadian workers compensation 
coverage is provided by monopolistic provincial funds; pension and life (not P&C) actuaries 
typically provide actuarial services to the provincial workers compensation funds.  
 
                                                 
6 In a number of countries (e.g., Australia, Singapore, the United Kingdom, and South Africa), insurers are 
required to hold provisions (i.e., the estimate of unpaid claims) at the 75% confidence level.  
10

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
Since this text was written with the hope that it would be used by actuaries throughout the world, 
the differences in both the names of the coverages and the coverages themselves presented a 
challenge in creating meaningful examples. There was an even greater challenge in finding 
sources of data representative of the wide range of claims behavior that often exists in different 
P&C coverages. Due to limitations in readily available global data sources, we rely on claim 
development data contained in Best’s Aggregates & Averages Property/Casualty United States & 
Canada – 2008 Edition (Best’s Aggregates & Averages)7 for many of our examples. We also rely 
on actuarial colleagues at Canadian insurers who volunteered data from their organizations. This 
data has been disguised through the use of multipliers and adjustments to protect the privacy of 
the organizations. 
 
While the names of the particular coverages and the patterns inherent in the data used in our 
examples may be unique to the U.S. or Canadian insurance environments, we believe that 
actuaries can apply the approaches, issues, and methodologies within the P&C (i.e., general or 
non-life) insurance market of any country around the world. 
 
 
Description of Coverages Referred to in This Book 
 
As noted above, we refer to and use examples for U.S. and Canadian lines of insurance. To assist 
the reader in understanding these types of coverage, we briefly describe each P&C coverage 
referred to in the text. The insurance coverages (also referred to as lines of business) listed below 
are in alphabetical order. 
 
 Accident benefits is a Canadian no-fault automobile coverage that provides numerous benefits 
following a covered accident including: medical and rehabilitation expenses, funeral benefits, 
death benefits, and loss of income benefits. Because this is a no-fault coverage, it is payable 
by the insured’s insurer regardless of fault for the accident. 
 
 Automobile property damage is a subcoverage of automobile liability insurance and provides 
protection to the insured against a claim or suit for damage to the property of a third-party 
arising from the operation of an automobile. 
 
 Collision is a subcoverage of automobile physical damage coverage providing protection 
against claims resulting from any damages to the insured’s vehicle caused by collision with 
another vehicle or object. Collision is a first-party coverage and responds to the claims of the 
insured when he or she is at fault. 
 
 Commercial automobile liability is a coverage that provides protection from the liability that 
can arise from the business use of owned, hired, or borrowed automobiles or from the 
operation of an employee’s automobiles on behalf of the business. 
 
 Crime insurance protects individuals and organizations from loss of money, securities, or 
inventory resulting from crime, including but not limited to: employee dishonesty, 
embezzlement, forgery, robbery, safe burglary, computer fraud, wire transfer fraud, and 
counterfeiting.  
                                                 
7 Best’s Aggregates & Averages is a comprehensive reference with current and historical statistics on the 
U.S. and Canadian P&C insurance industries. It provides industry-wide aggregates and long-term statistical 
studies. It also provides a complete financial overview of the P&C industry based on consolidated industry 
performance. 
11

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
 Direct compensation is a Canadian automobile coverage that provides for damage to, or loss 
of use of, an automobile or its contents, to the extent that the driver of another vehicle was at 
fault for the accident. It is called direct compensation because, even though someone else 
caused the damage, the insured person collects directly from his or her insurer instead of from 
the person who caused the accident. 
 
 General liability in the U.S. and Canada covers a wide array of insurance products. The 
principal exposures covered by general liability insurance are: premises liability, operations 
liability, products liability, completed operations liability, and professional (i.e., errors and 
omissions) liability. 
 
 Medical malpractice is also known as medical professional liability insurance. This coverage 
is often further separated into hospital professional and physician/surgeon professional 
liability insurance. Medical malpractice coverage responds to the unique general liability 
exposures present for insureds (both individuals and organizations) offering medical care and 
related professional services. We use an example from a pivotal paper, “Loss Reserve 
Adequacy Testing: A Comprehensive, Systematic Approach” by James R. Berquist and 
Richard E. Sherman.
8 While the data for the medical malpractice example is obviously very 
dated, the methodology, approach, and conclusions remain applicable today. 
 
 Personal automobile insurance is also known as private passenger automobile insurance. 
Automobile insurance (either personal or commercial) can provide a variety of coverages, 
including first-party and third-party coverages; the available coverages are dependent upon 
the jurisdiction in which the insurance is written. 
 
 Primary insurance refers to the first layer of insurance coverage. Primary insurance pays 
compensation in the event of claims arising out of an insured event ahead (first) of any other 
insurance coverages that the policyholder may have. 
 
 Private passenger automobile liability provides third-party liability protection to the insured 
against a claim or suit for bodily injury or property damage arising out of the operation of a 
private passenger automobile.  
 
 Private passenger automobile physical damage is a personal lines coverage providing 
protection against damage to or theft of a covered private passenger automobile.  
 
 Property insurance provides protection against most risks to property, such as fire, theft, and 
some weather damages. There are many specialized forms of property insurance including 
fire insurance, flood insurance, earthquake insurance, home insurance, and boiler and 
machinery insurance. 
 
 Umbrella and excess insurance typically refers to liability types of coverage available to 
individuals and companies protecting them against claims above and beyond the amounts 
covered by primary insurance policies or in some circumstances for claims not covered by the 
primary policies. 
 
                                                 
8 PCAS, 1977. 
12

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
 U.S. workers compensation provides coverage for the benefits the insured (i.e., the employer) 
becomes legally responsible for due to workplace injury, illness, and/or disease. The 
complete name for this U.S. coverage is workers compensation and employers liability 
insurance. U.S. workers compensation also covers the cost to defend against, and possibly 
pay, liability claims made against the employer (i.e., the insured) on account of bodily injury 
to an employee. 
 
 
Key Terminology 
 
We generally use italics for the first reference and definition of a new term. Throughout this text, 
we strive to use definitions contained within Standards of Practice and Statements of Principles of 
the CAS and the Academy. We indicate where definitions of the CAS or Academy differ from the 
Standards of Practice of the CIA. We also strive to clearly identify wherever we deviate from 
definitions of the U.S. and Canadian professional actuarial organizations.  
 
At the end of each chapter, we present exhibits, some of which include multiple sheets, in Roman 
numeric order. On all these exhibits, we include detailed footnotes supporting the calculations. 
 
 
Insurer 
 
Throughout this book, we use the term insurer to represent any risk bearer for P&C exposures, 
whether an insurance company, self-insured entity, or other. There are certain situations where a 
different approach or different factors within a technique may be more appropriate for insurance 
companies (including reinsurance companies) than self-insurers (including organizations with 
funded self-insured programs, captive insurers, pooling associations, etc.). When this happens, we 
clearly identify the appropriate course of action for the specific type of risk bearer. 
 
 
Reserves 
 
The term reserves itself is tricky. The financial statements of insurers in the U.S. and Canada 
contain many different types of reserves including: case reserves, loss reserves, bulk and IBNR 
reserves, case LAE reserves, unearned premium reserves, reserves for bad debts, reserves for rate 
credits and retrospective adjustments, general and contingency reserves, and earthquake reserves. 
The primary focus of this text, however, is estimating unpaid claims and claim adjustment 
expenses. 
 
ASOP 43 limits the term reserve to its strict definition as an amount booked in a financial 
statement. ASOP 43 defines the term unpaid claim estimate to be the actuary’s estimate of the 
obligation for future payment resulting from claims due to past events. ASOP 43 further defines 
unpaid claim estimate analysis to be the process of developing an unpaid claim estimate.  
 
In this text, we strive to use terminology consistent with ASOP 43. We acknowledge that many 
actuaries and the professionals they work with are more familiar with the term reserves than 
unpaid claim estimate; similarly, the term reserving is more frequently used today than estimating 
unpaid claims. Nevertheless, we predominantly use the terminology of ASOP 43, in an attempt to 
be consistent with more recent CAS developments aimed at improving communication and an 
13

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
effort to use terminology that is consistent with actuarial standards of practice throughout the 
world. 
 
We differentiate between unpaid claim estimate and carried reserve. The unpaid claim estimate is 
the result of the application of a particular estimation technique. For the same line of business and 
the same experience period, different estimation techniques will likely generate different unpaid 
claim estimates. In addition, the unpaid claim estimate will likely change from one valuation date 
to another for the same portfolio. The carried reserve for unpaid claims is the amount reported in 
a published statement or in an internal statement of financial condition. 
  
The unpaid claims estimate includes five components: case outstanding on known claims, 
provision for future development on known claims, estimate for reopened claims, provision for 
claims incurred but not reported, and provision for claims in transit (i.e., claims reported but not 
recorded). We use the terms case outstanding or unpaid case to refer to the estimates of unpaid 
claims established by the claims department, third-party adjusters, or independent adjusters for 
known and reported claims only; case outstanding do not include future development on reported 
claims. Actuaries refer to the sum of the remaining four components (i.e., provision for future 
development on known claims, estimate for reopened claims, provision for claims incurred but 
not reported, and provision for claims in transit) as the broad definition of incurred but not 
reported (IBNR). 
 
IBNR claims are often further separated into two components: 
 
 Incurred but not yet reported claims (pure IBNR or narrow definition of IBNR) 
 Incurred but not enough reported (IBNER, commonly referred to as development on known 
claims) 
 
One of the most important reasons for separating IBNR into its components is to test the 
adequacy of case outstanding over time. This can be an important management tool and a useful 
tool for the actuary when determining which methods are most appropriate for estimating unpaid 
claims. 
 
Throughout this book, unless specifically noted otherwise, we use the broad definition of IBNR. 
We also use the terms IBNR and estimated IBNR interchangeably. 
 
In Part 2, Chapter 3, we discuss the importance of the actuary completely understanding the 
different types of data provided for the purpose of estimating unpaid claims. The actuary must 
understand whether or not the data include or exclude: IBNR, estimates of unpaid claim 
adjustment expenses, recoverables from salvage and/or subrogation, reinsurance recoveries, and 
policyholder deductibles.  
 
 
Claims, Losses, and Claim Counts
 
 
The terms claims and losses are used interchangeably in this text. We purposefully use the term 
claims rather than losses since claims is used more frequently in standards of practice of the U.S. 
and Canadian actuarial organizations as well as other international actuarial organizations. The 
term claims is also more frequently used for financial reporting purposes of insurers. We 
recognize that the current practice within many U.S. and Canadian insurance organizations is still 
to use the term losses – particularly when referring to ultimate losses, expected losses, loss ratios, 
14

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
and loss adjustment expenses. Nevertheless, we have specifically selected to use the term claims. 
Thus, in this text, we refer to ultimate claims, expected claims, claim ratios, and claim adjustment 
expenses.  
 
We differentiate between claims (dollar values) and claim counts (or number of claims). 
 
 
Reported Claims 
 
In this text, we use the term reported claims instead of incurred claims (or incurred losses). While 
the term incurred losses is used by many throughout the P&C insurance industry, it can be 
misunderstood as to whether or not it includes IBNR. Many actuaries use the labels case incurred 
or incurred on reported claims to specifically note that the losses do not include IBNR. For 
consistency and simplicity throughout this book, we choose the term reported claims. Reported 
claims (both in the text and exhibits of this book) generally refer to the sum of cumulative paid 
claims and case outstanding estimates at a particular point in time. In certain methods or 
discussions, which are clearly defined in the text, we will refer to incremental instead of 
cumulative reported claims.  
 
 
Ultimate Claims
 
 
Ultimate claims represent the total dollar value after all claims are settled and closed without any 
chance of reopened claims.9 For some short-tail lines of insurance, such as some lines of property 
insurance and automobile physical damage, insurers generally know the value of ultimate claims 
within a relatively short period of time, often within one or two years after the end of the accident 
period. However, for long-tail lines of insurance, such as U.S. general liability and workers 
compensation, it may take many years, and in some situations even decades, before the insurer 
knows the value of ultimate claims.  
 
A key step in the actuarial process of estimating unpaid claims is the projection of ultimate 
claims. In this book we present numerous techniques for estimating unpaid claims. While you can 
mathematically manipulate many of the methods to simply derive the unpaid claim estimate, 
wherever possible we first present the projection of ultimate claims. Using the projected ultimate 
claims, we then calculate the estimate of unpaid claims for IBNR and the total unpaid claim 
estimate (i.e., the sum of IBNR and case outstanding). We believe that the projected ultimate 
claims are valuable for the purpose of evaluating and selecting the final unpaid claim estimate 
and for determining the accuracy of the prior estimate of unpaid claims. We address the 
evaluation of numerous estimation techniques in detail in the last chapter of Part 3.  
 
 
Claim-Related Expenses 
 
In this text, we use the terms claim adjustment expenses and claim-related expenses to refer to 
total claim adjustment expenses (i.e., the sum of ALAE and ULAE, or the sum of DCC and 
                                                 
9 Some accounting approaches estimate ultimate claims on a policy year basis in a manner that includes 
losses yet to be incurred. In this book, we address only losses incurred through a specified point in time.   
 
15

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 1 - Overview 
 
 
A&O). We continue to use the terms ALAE and ULAE because of their wide-spread use and 
acceptance. In our examples, unless specifically noted, claims include ALAE and exclude ULAE. 
 
 
Experience Period 
 
We use the term experience period to refer to the years included in a specific technique for 
estimating unpaid claims.  
 
 
Emergence 
 
In this book, the term emergence is used to refer to the reporting or development of claims and 
claim counts over time. In Canada, many actuaries use the term emergence to refer to the rate of 
payment of ultimate claims, particularly in the context of calculating estimates of discounted 
claim liabilities.  
 
16

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 – THE CLAIMS PROCESS 
 
 
Overview 
 
The financial condition of a P&C insurer cannot be assessed accurately without sound estimates 
of unpaid claims. But what are unpaid claim estimates and where do they come from? Claim and 
claim adjustment expense reserves (as reported on an insurer’s financial statements) represent an 
insurer’s liability for unpaid claims as of a particular point in time. Both claims professionals and 
actuaries have responsibilities related to the unpaid claim estimate of an insurer. As previously 
noted, there are five elements comprising the total unpaid claim estimate: 
 
 Case outstanding 
 Provision for future development on known claims 
 Estimate for reopened claims  
 Provision for claims incurred but not reported  
 Provision for claims in transit (incurred and reported but not recorded) 
 
Claims professionals are responsible for estimating case outstanding on claims that are reported 
to the insurer; these estimates are also known as “unpaid case” and “case estimates.” According 
to consolidated claim development data for the U.S. insurance industry as a whole, unpaid case, 
net of reinsurance, represent less than 50% of total unpaid claims and claim expenses.
10 (The 
proportion of unpaid case to total unpaid claims varies tremendously by line of business and from 
insurer to insurer.) While claims professionals typically estimate case outstanding, actuaries are 
responsible for estimating the remaining components of total unpaid claims.  
 
In this chapter, we focus on the unpaid claim estimate from the perspective of the claims 
professional. As we will see in later chapters, actuaries rely on the historical variations in the case 
outstanding generated by claims professionals as a base for determining the remaining 
components of total unpaid claims. Therefore, it is important for the actuary to understand the 
entire claims process. The actuary must understand why the estimated value of a reported claim 
could vary over time and how changes in case outstanding are processed by an insurer. 
 
 
Claims Professionals 
 
The claims professional, who is often referred to as a claims examiner or claims adjuster, can be 
an employee of the insurer or an employee of an organization external to the insurer. Large 
commercial insurers generally maintain internal claims departments with many claims adjusters 
managing the claims. Small to mid-sized commercial insurers and self-insurers often hire third-
party claims administrators (TPAs) to handle a specific book of claims. TPAs frequently handle 
the claims from beginning to end (i.e., from the initial report to the final payment). Insurers 
usually require the TPA to report details of the claims on a predetermined basis (e.g., monthly or 
quarterly). In certain circumstances, a TPA manages all the claims of an insurer, and the insurer 
only has a minimal number of claims personnel reviewing the activities of the TPA. The 
compensation for services of a TPA is generally based on a contract for the entire book of 
business and not by individual claim, though compensation varies among TPAs.  
                                                 
10 The source of data is Best’s Aggregates & Averages (2008 Edition), consolidated annual statement data 
for the U.S. insurance industry.  
17

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
An insurer may hire an independent adjuster (IA) to handle an individual claim or a group of 
claims. The insurer, who may have an active claims department, may need an IA to handle a 
specific type of claim or a claim in a particular region where the insurer does not have the 
necessary expertise. Also when a disaster occurs, such as a hurricane or earthquake, the insurer 
may hire a number of IAs (or a firm of IAs) to handle the large volume of claims. The 
compensation for the services of IAs is generally based on a fee per claim. 
 
 
A Claim is Reported 
 
The estimation process for unpaid claims begins when an insured first reports a claim, or notice 
of an event, to the insurer. Insureds may report claims in several ways, including but not limited 
to: telephone (often to a call center), Internet (the insurer’s Web site), e-mail, in person at an 
insurer’s branch office, notice to an insurance intermediary (such as an insurance agent or 
broker), or a lawyer’s letter with a formal statement of claim. A claims professional of the insurer 
then reviews the initial claim report.  
  
The first decision a claims adjuster, either internal or external to the insurer, encounters is 
whether or not the reported claim is covered under the terms of a valid policy. To determine 
whether the reported incident represents a covered claim and to assist in the establishment of an 
initial case outstanding estimate, claims professionals generally review the following: 
 
 Effective dates of the policy 
 Date of occurrence 
 Terms and conditions of the policy 
 Policy exclusions 
 Policy endorsements  
 Policy limits 
 Deductibles 
 Reinsurance or excess coverage 
 Reporting requirements 
 Mitigation of loss requirements 
 Extent of injury and damages 
 Extent of fault 
 Potential other parties at fault  
 Potential other sources of recovery 
 
Once the claims professional recognizes that a liability exists, or may exist, for a covered 
incident, he or she will establish an initial case outstanding. For some types of claims, insurers 
may rely on a formula or tabular value
11 as the basis of the initial case outstanding. For example, 
an insurer may initially set all automobile physical damage glass claims at $500. For U.S. 
workers compensation claims, the insurer may use a tabular system where the type of injury 
dictates the initial case outstanding value. For other types of claims, a claims professional may 
                                                 
11 Tabular estimates of unpaid claims are used for some lines of insurance whereby initial case outstanding 
values are set based on specific predetermined formula, which take into account characteristics of the 
injured party and the insurance benefits. The use of tabular values would be most common for accident 
benefits and U.S. workers compensation insurance. Not all insurers, however, writing these coverages use 
tabular systems.  
18

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
analyze the specific details of the insured event to generate an independent estimate of the initial 
case outstanding. 
 
It is important to recognize that claims professionals generally estimate case outstanding based on 
the information known at that time. As additional information about a claim becomes available, the 
estimated value of the claim will likely change. (We demonstrate this point later in the chapter with 
a detailed example.) 
 
There are several different approaches commonly used by insurers to set case outstanding. These 
different approaches may best be understood with an example. Assume a claim is reported under a 
medical malpractice policy with a policy limit of $1 million. One of the most common approaches 
is to establish the case outstanding based on the best estimate of the ultimate settlement value of 
such a claim including consideration of future inflationary forces. Other insurers may set the case 
outstanding based on the maximum value, which would be the policy limit of $1 million. Another 
approach is for the claims adjuster to seek the advice of legal counsel. Assume that the legal 
counsel estimates that there is an 80% chance that the claim will settle without any payment and a 
20% chance of a full policy limit claim. Some insurers may then set the case outstanding based on 
the mode, which would be $0; and others may set the case outstanding based on the expected value 
calculation or $200,000 [(80% x $0) + (20% x $1 million)]. 
 
Insurers differ in their practices with respect to the establishment of case outstanding for claim 
adjustment expenses. While some insurers establish case outstanding for the estimated claim 
amount only; others establish case outstanding for the estimated claim amount and all claim-
related expenses. Even for those insurers who do establish total estimated claim amount and 
claim adjustment expense case outstanding, there are differences in whether or not the case 
outstanding for estimated claim amount and claim-related expenses are recorded and tracked 
separately. Some insurers may establish case outstanding for ALAE (or DCC) only and other 
insurers for ULAE (or A&O) only.  
 
There are also different practices for the establishment of case outstanding for salvage and 
subrogation recoveries. Some insurers set up specific case outstanding based on an estimate of the 
salvage or subrogation recovery that the insurer expects to receive (i.e., the case outstanding is net 
of expected salvage and subrogation recoveries). Many insurers, however, simply track the actual 
salvage and subrogation recoveries but do not establish case outstanding for these types of 
recoveries. 
 
For many insurers, determining the case outstanding for reinsurance recoveries is a fairly straight-
forward exercise. When the reinsurance is proportional (i.e., quota share), insurers determine the 
ceded case outstanding based on the reinsurer’s share of the total case outstanding. If the 
reinsurance is excess of loss, the reinsurance ceded case outstanding for a claim that exceeds the 
insurer’s retention is simply the total case outstanding estimate (provided that the claims adjuster 
estimates the case outstanding on a total limits basis) less the insurer’s retention.  
 
 
The Life of a Claim 
 
One single insurance claim may have a life that extends over a number of years. We will use the 
example of an automobile insurer who issued a policy effective for a one-year term beginning on 
December 1, 2007 and ending on November 30, 2008. Assume an accident occurred on 
November 15, 2008, and the insurer did not receive notice of the claim until February 20, 2009, 
19

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
more than two months after the end of the policy year. Starting on February 20, 2009 (the report 
date of the claim), a claims professional will record a number of transactions related to this claim.  
 
The different types of claim transactions over the life of the claim could include: 
 
 Establishment of the initial case outstanding estimate  
 Notification to the reinsurer if the claim is expected to exceed the insurer’s retention 
 A partial claim payment to injured party 
 Expense payment for independent adjuster 
 Change in case outstanding estimate 
 Claim payment (assumed to be final payment) 
 Takedown of case outstanding and closure of claim 
 Reopening of the claim and establishment of a new case outstanding estimate 
 Partial payment for defense litigation 
 Final claim payment  
 Final payment for defense litigation 
 Closure of claim 
 
We summarize the details for our sample claim in the following table. (We use the abbreviation 
case O/S for case outstanding in the following table.) 
 
20

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
 
Table 1 – Claim Fact Summary 
Policy Period December 1, 2007 to November 30, 2008 
Date of Accident November 15, 2008 
Date of Claim Report February 20, 2009 
 
Claim Transactions 
 
Date 
 
Transaction 
Reported Value  
of Claim to Date 
Cumulative
Paid to Date 
February 20, 2009 Case O/S of $15,000 established for claim only $15,000 $0 
    
April 1, 2009 Claim payment of $1,500 – case O/S reduced to 
$13,500 (case O/S change of -$1,500) 
$15,000 $1,500 
    
May 1, 2009 Expense payment to IA of $500 – no change in 
case O/S 
$15,500 $2,000 
    
September 1, 2009 Case O/S fo r claim increased to $30,000 
(case O/S change of +$16,500) 
$32,000 $2,000 
    
March 1, 2010 Claim thought to  be settled with additional 
payment of $24,000 – case O/S reduced to $0 
and claim closed (case O/S change of  
-$30,000) 
$26,000 $26,000 
    
January 25, 2011 Claim reopened with case O/S of $10,000 for 
claim and $10,000 for defense costs 
$46,000 $26,000 
    
April 15, 2011 Partial payment of $5,000 for defense litigation 
and case O/S for defense costs reduced to 
$5,000 – no change in case O/S for claim 
$46,000 $31,000 
    
September 1, 2011 Final claim payment for an additional $12,000 – 
case O/S for claim reduced to $0 (case O/S 
change of -$10,000) 
$48,000 $43,000 
    
March 1, 2012 Final defense cost payment for an additional 
$6,000 – case O/S for defense costs reduced to 
$0 and claim closed (case O/S change of  
-$5,000) 
$49,000 $49,000 
 
As explained in Chapter 1, case outstanding represent the sum of the values assigned to specific 
known claims whether determined by claims adjusters or set by formula. In our example, case 
outstanding refers to the estimates, for claim and claim-related expenses (e.g., IA and defense 
costs), for the one claim that occurred on November 15, 2008. The initial case outstanding is the 
adjuster’s estimate of the total amount the insurer will pay on this individual claim at the time of 
first notice to the insurer (i.e., February 20, 2009). 
 
The example in Table 1 illustrates a number of important characteristics of insured claims. First, 
claim activity typically extends over a period of time – more than three years for this particular 
claim. Second, the estimated value of a claim can change over the life of the claim and is not 
ultimately established until the claim is finally closed. In our example, the insurer initially closes 
21

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
the claim on March 1, 2010, but then reopens it almost one year later on January 25, 2011, with 
an increase to the case outstanding. The estimated case outstanding value can turn out to be too 
high or too low, although it is reasonable in light of the information available at the time when the 
claims professional sets the estimate.  
 
A third characteristic is that an insured claim can have many different types of payments 
associated with it. In our example, the insurer makes an initial claim payment to the injured party 
on April 1, 2009. This claim payment provides for out-of-pocket medical expenses reported by 
the claimant. Since the insurer questioned the validity of the claim, they hired an IA; as a result, 
there was a payment of $500 for the IA’s services on May 1, 2009.  (Insurers in the U.S. would 
classify this type of expense as A&O; in Canada, they would categorize this expense as ALAE.) 
On March 1, 2010, the insurer makes another payment of $24,000 to the claimant for lost wages 
and additional medical expenses. At this time, the insurer assumes this to be the final payment. 
Roughly one year later, a claims professional reopens the claim. Over the course of the following 
year, the insurer makes further payments for defense litigation, additional lost wages, and medical 
expenses. 
 
A fourth characteristic of insured claims is that there are many dates associated with each claim: 
 
 Policy effective date is the date the insurer issues the insurance policy (December 1, 2007) 
 
 Accident date, or date of loss, is the date the covered injury occurs (November 15, 2008) 
 
 Report date is the date the insurer receives notice of the claim (February 20, 2009) 
 
 Transaction date is the date on which either a case outstanding transaction takes place or a 
payment is made (see all the dates in the preceding table) 
 
 Closing dates are the dates on which the claim is initially closed (March 1, 2010) and finally 
closed (March 1, 2012) 
 
 Reopening date is the date the insurer reopens the claim (January 25, 2011) 
 
This example clearly does not cover every combination of transactions possible. Some claims 
open and close on the same day with a single payment. Such claims would have only one 
transaction and would likely never show a case outstanding value. In our example, when the 
partial payment occurs on April 1, 2009, the insurer reduces the case outstanding estimate by 
exactly the same amount as the claim payment. However, this chain of events may not happen for 
all claims. As an insurer makes a specific payment, it may choose to reduce the case outstanding 
more than the payment, less than the payment, not reduce it at all, or even increase it, depending 
on the exact circumstances of the particular claim. 
 
The payments on a specific claim are the amounts paid through a given date or over some 
specified time period. Therefore, when referring to paid claims, it is important to clearly state 
whether the claims are cumulative or incremental. Cumulative paid claims refer to the sum of all 
claim payments through the valuation date. Incremental paid claims refer to the sum of all claim 
payments made during a specified time interval. 
 
22

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
In the above example, the cumulative paid claims including claim-related expenses are: 
 
 $1,500 at April 1, 2009 
 $2,000 at May 1, 2009 
 $26,000 at March 1, 2010 
 $31,000 at April 15, 2011 
 $43,000 at September 1, 2011 
 $49,000 at March 1, 2012 
 
The incremental paid claims during calendar year 2009 (January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009) 
are $2,000; the incremental paid claims during calendar years 2010, 2011, and 2012 are $24,000, 
$17,000, and $6,000, respectively. 
 
The case outstanding is the estimated amount of future payments on a specific claim at any given 
point in time. In our example, the initial case outstanding recorded on the report date of the claim 
is $15,000. This amount varies over the life of the claim; just before the claim initially closes in 
March 2010, the case outstanding is $30,000. When the claim is reopened in January 2011, a new 
case outstanding is established for both claim amount and defense costs. Ultimately, the claim 
settles for a greater amount than the case outstanding for both claim amount and defense costs. 
 
Similar to paid claims, it is important to define the time period when referring to reported claims. 
Generally, when looking at a specific claim, we use the term “reported claims” (or case incurred) 
to mean the sum of cumulative claim payments through a specific date and the case outstanding at 
the same point in time. Using the example above, the reported claims are: 
 
 $15,000 at the time of first report (i.e., February 20, 2009) 
  
 $15,500 at May 1, 2009 after a payment of $500 to an IA 
 
 $32,000 at September 1, 2009, when the insurer increases the case outstanding to $30,000 
($2,000 cumulative paid claims + $30,000 case outstanding) 
 
 $26,000 upon initial closing on March 1, 2010 ($26,000 cumulative paid claims + $0 case 
outstanding) 
 
 $46,000 upon reopening on January 25, 2011 ($26,000 cumulative paid claims + $10,000 
claims and $10,000 defense costs case outstanding) 
 
 $48,000 at September 1, 2011 after final claim payment ($43,000 cumulative paid claims and 
LAE + $5,000 case outstanding for defense costs) 
 
 $49,000 at March 1, 2012 after final defense costs payment ($49,000 cumulative paid claims 
and LAE + $0 case outstanding) 
 
For a particular claim, we calculate the reported claims over a period of time as the reported 
claims at the end of the period minus the reported claims at the beginning of the period. 
Mathematically, this is equivalent to adding the incremental paid claims over the period to the 
change in case outstanding (ending case outstanding minus beginning case outstanding). In our 
example, the reported claims for the period beginning on January 1, 2009 and ending on 
December 31, 2009 are $32,000. As of January 1, 2009, the claim was not yet reported and thus 
23

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
there are $0 reported claims for the claim. The incremental claim payments during 2009 are 
$2,000 and the change in case outstanding is $30,000 ($30,000 ending case outstanding minus $0 
beginning case outstanding). The reported claims over the period January 1, 2010 to 
December 31, 2010 are -$6,000. The incremental claim payments in 2010 are $24,000 and the 
change in case outstanding is -$30,000 (ending case outstanding of $0 minus beginning case 
outstanding of $30,000). You can use similar calculations to derive the reported claims during 
2011 and 2012. 
 
As indicated above, we use the term “reported claims” under two contexts, incremental and 
cumulative, and it is important to look at the time period involved to differentiate between these 
two contexts. For a particular claim or the aggregate of a group of claims, we can summarize 
reported claims at a specific point in time. In such a context, reported claims are equal to the sum 
of cumulative paid claims through a specific date and case outstanding as of that same date. Many 
actuarial projection techniques rely on this definition of reported claims.  
 
Reported claims can also refer to the claim activity over an interval of time. An example of 
reported claims used in this context is the insurer’s income statement. As previously mentioned, 
we define the reported claims over a period of time using the following formulae: 
 
   Reported claims = reported claims at end of period – reported claims at beginning of period 
 
   Reported claims = paid claims during period + case outstanding at end of period 
 – case outstanding at beginning of period 
 
 
Further Claim Examples 
 
In Table 2 (on the following page), we present additional illustrations of how claim transactions can 
affect reported claims. (We use the abbreviation case O/S to refer to case outstanding in Table 2.) 
24

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 2 - The Claims Process 
 
 
 
Table 2 – Examples of Changes in Reported Values 
 At December 31, 2007 Transactions During 2008 At December 31, 2008 
 
Example 
Number 
Cumulative 
Paid 
Claims 
 
Case 
O/S 
 
Reported 
Claims 
 
Paid 
Claims  
Change 
in  
Case O/S 
 
Reported 
Claims 
Cumulative  
Paid 
Claims 
 
Case 
O/S 
 
Reported
Claims 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
1 - - - 100 - 100 100 - 100 
2 200 - 200 50 - 50 250 - 250 
(Making payments where there had been no previous case outstanding increases reported claim.) 
3 - - - - 1,000 1,000 - 1,000 1,000 
(Establishing a case outstanding increases reported claim by the amount of the case outstanding.) 
4 - 1,000 1,000 100 (100) - 100 900 1,000 
(Payment with offsetting case outstanding reduction has no effect on reported claim.) 
5 500 5,000 5,500 200 (1,000) (800) 700 4,000 4,700 
(If case outstanding is reduced by a larger amount than the claim payment, the impact is a reduction to reported claim.) 
6 5,000 10,000 15,000 12,000 ( 10,000) 2,000 17,000 - 17,000 
(If payment on closing exceeds case outstanding, reported claim transaction is positive.) 
7 5,000 10,000 15,000 6,000 ( 10,000) (4,000) 11,000 - 11,000 
(If payment on closing is less than case outstanding estimate, reported claim transaction is negative.) 
8 5,000 15,000 20,000 4,500 - 4,500 9,500 15,000 24,500 
(Claim payment with no change in case outstanding increases the reported claim.) 
9 3,000 10,000 13,000 - (4,000)  (4,000) 3,000 6,000 9,000 
(No payment and decrease in case outstanding decreases the reported claim.) 
10 2,000 10,000 12,000 1,000 5, 000 6,000 3,000 15,000 18,000 
(Payment and increase in case outstanding result in increase in reported claim.) 
 
Columns (4) and (10) of the above table show reported claims as of year-end 2007 and 2008, 
respectively. Reported claims at a point in time (i.e., year-end 2007 and 2008) are equal to the 
cumulative claim payments plus the case outstanding at that point in time. However, reported 
claims shown in Column (7) represent the incremental reported value during the period of time 
running from January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008. Reported claims over the year are equal to 
sum of the payments during the year (Column (5)) and the changes in case outstanding  
(Column (6)). 
 
The transactions presented in Table 2 vary with respect to the impact on total reported claims. In 
the first two examples, there are payments made in 2008 on claims where there was no prior 
existing case outstanding at December 31, 2007; thus total reported claims for both of these claims 
increase. Such payments could occur when the insurer reopens a claim. In a situation where the 
payment made during the year is offset by an equal reduction in the case outstanding, there is no 
change to reported claim (Example Number 4). If the payment is larger than the reduction in case 
outstanding, then the reported claim will increase (Example Number 6). If the payment is smaller 
than the reduction in case outstanding, then the reported claim will decrease (Examples Number 5 
and 7). A change in case outstanding without any associated payment will also impact the reported 
claim (Examples Number 3 and 9). 
 
While the reported claims in the interval can be positive or negative, the reported claims at a point 
in time are rarely negative. Remember that we define the reported claims at a point in time to 
equal cumulative payments plus case outstanding at that point in time.  
25

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
PART 2 – INFORMATION GATHERING 
 
 
Introduction to Part 2 – Information Gathering .....................................................................  27 
 
Chapter 3 – Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims ....  28 
 
Chapter 4 – Meeting with Management ................................................................................  44 
 
Chapter 5 – The Development Triangle ................................................................................  51 
 
Chapter 6 – The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool ..............................................  63 
26

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO PART 2 – INFORMATION GATHERING 
 
 
In the chapter “Loss Reserving” in the Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science (2001), Ronald 
Wiser describes a four-phase approach to the process of estimating unpaid claims: 
 
 Exploring the data to identify its key characteristics and possible anomalies. Balancing data 
to other verified sources should be undertaken at this point. 
 
 Applying appropriate techniques for estimating unpaid claims. 
 
 Evaluating the conflicting results of the various methods used, with an attempt to reconcile or 
explain the different outcomes. At this point, the projected ultimate amounts are evaluated in 
contexts outside their original frame of analysis. 
 
 Monitoring projections of claim development over subsequent calendar periods. Deviations 
of actual development from projected development of counts or amounts are one of the most 
useful diagnostic tools in evaluating the accuracy of unpaid claim estimates. 
 
In Chapters 3 through 6 of this book, we focus on Mr. Wiser’s first phase, the exploratory 
analysis of the data. The process for collecting and understanding the data and other relevant 
information is so critical that we devote four chapters to the topic. We begin Chapter 3 with a 
description of the types of data that actuaries use for estimating unpaid claims and present various 
options for organizing the data. 
  
Equally important to collecting quantitative data is developing an understanding of the 
environment in which the insurer operates. In Chapter 4, we discuss the importance of meeting 
with the management of both the claims and underwriting departments to gain a more complete 
understanding of the environment in which the insurer operates. We provide a list of possible 
questions for actuaries to use in their meetings with management. Changes in the insurer’s 
internal operations as well as changes in the external setting can affect the results of the various 
techniques for estimating unpaid claims in different ways. (In Part 3, Chapters 7 through 15, we 
review numerous examples of changing environments and examine the result of such changes on 
alternative techniques for estimating unpaid claims.) 
 
The development triangle is one of the actuary’s most important tools for displaying and 
analyzing data; it is an important component of many claims projection techniques. In Chapter 5, 
we describe in depth how to create a development triangle. The development triangle is also a 
critical tool in the evaluation of the influence of operational and environmental changes on 
claims. In Chapter 6, we present a detailed example of how actuaries can use development 
triangles as a diagnostic tool, allowing examination of the consequences of operational and 
environmental changes on historical claims. 
27

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 – UNDERSTANDING THE TYPES OF DATA USED IN 
THE ESTIMATION OF UNPAID CLAIMS 
 
 
The availability of appropriate data and information is essential for accurately estimating unpaid 
claims. We can classify data as originating from either internal or external sources. 
 
 
Sources of Data  
 
Large insurers are usually able to generate the detailed claims and exposure data required by 
actuaries for the estimation of unpaid claims from their own management information systems. 
Thus, actuaries working for large insurers often rely solely on data produced internally. 
 
Smaller insurers, however, may be more limited in the internal data that they can generate. The 
data may be limited in its volume and thus its credibility to the actuary, or the data may be 
unavailable due to systems limitations of the organization. Such situations may force actuaries to 
turn to external sources of data. Large insurers who recently entered a new line of insurance or a 
new geographical region (e.g., a new territory, state, or province) may also need to turn to 
external sources of information when developing estimates of unpaid claims.  
 
The sources of readily available external data vary by jurisdiction and by product line. The 
following are examples of external sources of information available in certain jurisdictions: 
 
United States 
 Insurance Services Office, Inc. (ISO) 
 National Council on Compensation Insurance (NCCI) 
 Reinsurance Association of America (RAA) 
 The Surety & Fidelity Association of America (SFAA) 
 A.M. Best Company (Best) 
 NAIC Annual Statement data 
 
Canada 
 Best 
 General Insurance Statistical Agency (GISA) 
 Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) 
 Reinsurance Research Council (RRC) 
 Market-Security Analysis & Research Inc. (MSA) 
 
Many insurers (of all sizes) use a combination of internally-generated data and external industry 
benchmarks. External information can be particularly valuable when selecting tail development 
factors, trend rates, and expected claim ratios (i.e., expected loss ratios). We address all of these 
topics in Part 3 of this book. Incorporating external information can also be useful when the 
actuary evaluates and attempts to reconcile the results of the various estimation methods in order 
to make a final selection of ultimate claims and unpaid claim estimate.  
 
28

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
It is important that actuaries recognize the potential shortcomings in the use of data generated 
from external sources. The International Actuarial Association (IAA) strongly believes that 
entity-specific data is far preferred over external data. There is a risk that external data may be 
misleading or irrelevant due to differences relating to: insurance products, case outstanding and 
settlement practices, insurers’ operations, coding, geographic areas, and mix of business and 
product types. Thus, the actuary must carefully evaluate the relevance and value of external 
data.12  
 
 
Homogeneity and Credibility of Data13 
 
Different lines of insurance exhibit different claim behaviors. For example, claims from insurance 
policies sold to businesses generally do not have the same characteristics as claims from 
insurance policies sold to individuals, even when the insurance coverages are identical. Likewise, 
claims for umbrella and excess insurance are different from claims for primary insurance. Even 
within a single line of insurance, the characteristics of claims by subcoverage can differ 
significantly. For example, claims involving only property damage for automobile liability 
policies are generally reported and paid very quickly and have a relatively low severity (i.e., 
average settlement value). On the other hand, claims arising from automobile accidents involving 
catastrophic spinal injuries may take years to settle in some jurisdictions and could ultimately cost 
millions of dollars.  
 
It is often possible to improve the accuracy of estimating unpaid claims by subdividing 
experience into groups exhibiting similar characteristics, such as comparable claim experience 
patterns, settlement patterns, or size of claim distributions. As a result, when separating data into 
groups for an analysis of unpaid claims, actuaries focus on the following key characteristics: 
 
 Consistency of the coverage triggered by the claims in the group (i.e., group claims that will 
generally be subject to the same or similar laws, policy terms, claims handling, etc.) 
 
 Volume of claim counts in the group  
 
 Length of time to report the claim once an insured event has occurred (i.e., reporting patterns) 
 
 Ability to develop an appropriate case outstanding estimate from earliest report through the 
life of the claim 
 
 Length of time to settle the claim once it is reported (i.e., settlement, or payment, patterns) 
 
 Likelihood of claim to reopen once it is settled 
 
 Average settlement value (i.e., severity) 
 
                                                 
12 The Academy’s Risk Management & Financial Reporting Council, Financial Reporting Committee 
argued to the International Actuarial Standards Board (IASB) that, in general, external data is typically 
used (and most appropriately used) only as a fallback where internal data is not sufficiently credible.  
 
13 The following section borrows from the CAS Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty 
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, issued in May 1988. 
29

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Actuaries strive to group claims by lines and sublines of business which display similar traits with 
respect to the characteristics listed above. They may also group claims by policy limits to achieve 
similar claims attributes within a block of business. 
 
The goal for the actuary is to divide the data into sufficiently homogeneous groupings without 
compromising the credibility of the data. Credibility refers to the predictive value given to a 
group of data. Increasing the homogeneity of the group of data or increasing the volume of data in 
the group tends to increase credibility. If the actuary divides the data into too many homogeneous 
groupings, however, there is a risk that the volume of data in the individual groups may become 
insufficient to perform a reliable analysis. This is a frequent challenge for the actuary. In “An 
Introduction to Credibility Theory,” Longley-Cook states: 
 
We may liken our statistics to a large crumbly loaf cake, which we may cut in 
slices to obtain easily edible helpings. The method of slicing may be chosen in 
different ways – across the cake, lengthwise down the cake, or even in horizontal 
slices – but only one method of slicing may be used at a time. If we try to slice 
the cake more than one way at a time, we shall be left with a useless collection of 
crumbs.
14 
 
Consider automobile accident benefits coverage15 as an example of how actuaries must decide 
how to divide the cake. Options include analyzing the claims in total or breaking out the claims 
into the individual components (e.g., medical/rehabilitation, disability income, death benefits, 
funeral services, and supplementary benefits). Certainly, the claims behavior is very different for 
funeral services claims than it is for medical/rehabilitation claims. There are differences in claims 
reporting patterns, settlement patterns, severity of claims, and frequency of claims between these 
subcoverages. However, if there is insufficient data by subcoverage, a detailed analysis may not 
produce a more accurate estimate of unpaid claims than the analysis based on the combined data 
for all of the accident benefits components. Further considerations for the actuary are efficiency 
and time and resource requirements of separate versus combined analyses. The funeral benefits 
may represent a stable portion of the total accident benefit claims and thus may not justify the 
time and resources required for independent analysis.  
 
We can raise similar questions with regards to many other lines of insurance with a combination 
of coverages or benefits under one policy. For example, is it preferable to analyze claims for 
bodily injury and property damage separately or on a combined basis for general liability, or for 
automobile liability insurance? 
 
Another consideration regarding the homogeneity and the grouping of data relates to changes in 
the portfolio. In some circumstances, it may be appropriate to combine personal automobile and 
commercial automobile data even though these lines typically exhibit different underlying claims 
patterns. However, if the relative volume of business is changing between these two lines of 
insurance, the grouping may not be appropriate. In Part 3, we present an example of the effect on 
various projection techniques of analyzing a portfolio where the volume of personal automobile is 
increasing at 5% per year while the commercial automobile volume is increasing at 30%. We will 
                                                 
14 PCAS, 1962. 
 
15 As described in Chapter 1 – Overview, accident benefits coverage provides for the medical needs of the 
driver and passengers arising from an automobile accident. Insurers in the U.S. call this coverage 
automobile no-fault. 
 
30

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
see that the consequence of the changing proportion on the various estimation techniques can be 
significant. 
 
 
Types of Data Used by Actuaries 
 
Claims and Claim Count Data 
 
Actuaries rely on many different types of data in the establishment and testing of unpaid claim 
estimates for an insurer. Some of the most common types of data include: 
 
 Incremental paid claims 
 Cumulative paid claims 
 Paid claims on closed claims 
 Paid claims on open claims 
 Case outstanding 
 Reported claims (i.e., sum of cumulative paid claims plus case outstanding) 
 Incremental reported claims 
 Reported claim counts 
 Claim counts on closed with payment  
 Claim counts on closed with no payment  
 Open claim counts 
 Reopened claim counts 
 
We can use all of the above data types with claims only (i.e., losses only), claim-related expenses, 
or claims and claim-related expenses combined.  
 
 
Claim-Related Expenses 
 
The actuary needs to know how the insurer handles expenses before using the data.  Where the 
claim data and policy limits include claim adjustment expenses, many actuaries combine 
historical claims and ALAE experience when conducting analyses of unpaid claims. Unless 
otherwise indicated, we use the term claims to denote both claims and ALAE combined. When 
the claim analysis includes only ALAE and not ULAE, the actuary needs to perform a separate 
analysis to evaluate the unpaid ULAE estimate.  
 
There are multiple ways to classify claim-related expenses, not just the one generic ALAE/ULAE 
split. As mentioned in Chapter 1 – Overview, in the U.S., for statutory reporting purposes, 
insurers categorize LAE as either defense and cost containment (DCC) or as adjusting and other 
(A&O). The DCC versus A&O split depends on the function of the expenses. A&O includes all 
claim adjuster costs regardless of whether or not they are attributable to internal adjusters (which 
may be viewed as overhead and difficult to attribute to an individual claim) or external 
independent adjusters (which are generally easily attributable to an individual claim). Various 
other reporting requirements may place different demands on how insurers categorize claims 
expenses. Insurers may also use their own internal approach to categorizing claim expenses, 
suitable to their own internal claim management processes. It is therefore sometimes necessary 
for the actuary to investigate which claim expenses are included in the data being used and how 
the terms are defined. For example, different people working for the same insurer may define the 
31

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
term ALAE in different ways: one way by financial reporting systems so as to meet external 
reporting requirements and another way to meet internal claim management needs.  
 
 
Multiple Currencies
 
 
Claims data for some insurers may exist in the information systems in different currencies. 
Depending on the volume of claims in differing currencies, the actuary may need to adjust the 
data prior to the analysis. One approach is to separate the data by currency and then combine it 
after translating it using the appropriate exchange rates at a common point in time. For example, 
assume that claims data are in Euros, pounds sterling, and U.S. dollars; if the actuary is 
conducting an analysis that requires a final unpaid claim estimate in Euros, the actuary could then 
convert all amounts to Euros using current exchange rates.  
 
 
Large Claims 
 
When conducting analyses of unpaid claims, it is important for actuaries to be aware of how large 
claims influence the various estimation techniques. As we will see in a later part of this book, the 
presence of unusually large claims can distort some of the methods used for estimating unpaid 
claims. In these situations, the actuary may choose to exclude the large claims from the initial 
projection and then, at the end of the unpaid claims analysis, add a case specific projection for the 
reported portion of large claims and a smoothed provision for the IBNR portion of large claims. 
In Part 3, we discuss alternative approaches that the actuary may use to adjust the estimation 
techniques for large claims. 
 
The determination of the size criteria of a large claim is not a precise science. It may vary by line 
of business, by geographic region, and even between analyses of unpaid claims. Actuarial 
judgment is critical in determining how to adjust the analyses for large claims. Actuaries consider 
the following in establishing the large claim threshold: 
 
 Number of claims over the threshold each year 
 Size of claim relative to policy limits 
 Size of claim relative to reinsurance limits 
 Credibility of internal data regarding large claims 
 Availability of relevant external data 
 
One starting point for the actuary is large claims reports from the insurer’s claims department. 
Claims departments often maintain reports that routinely track the individual experience of claims 
exceeding a certain threshold. The definition of a large claim, however, may differ between the 
claims department and the actuary. For example, the claims department may have set up internal 
controls that require monthly reporting on all claims greater than $100,000. However, to the 
actuary, a large claim may be any claim with a reported value (i.e., the sum of cumulative paid 
claims plus the current estimate of unpaid case) greater than $1 million. The actuary can also seek 
advice from the reinsurance department when deciding upon the large claim threshold. 
 
 
32

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Recoveries 
 
There are numerous types of recoveries available to insurers that could affect an insurer’s net 
claims experience. Deductibles are one of the most common types of insurer recoveries, and it is 
important for the actuary to understand how the insurer processes claims with respect to 
deductibles. For some lines of insurance, such as automobile physical damage, claim payments to 
insured policyholders are typically reduced due to the application of the deductible. Since this 
line of insurance is a first-party coverage, it is reasonable to apply the deductible before issuing 
payment to the insured. However, for general liability, insurers usually make claim payments 
before the application of the deductible. Since general liability is a third-party line of insurance, 
the injured party is not the insured party. The insurer normally issues a payment to the injured 
party and then, following the payment, seeks recovery of the deductible from the insured. Insurers 
differ in their practices with respect to case outstanding for deductibles. Some insurers establish a 
case outstanding net of the deductible while other insurers do not consider the deductible in the 
establishment of the case outstanding. Even within the same insurer, practices may vary between 
lines of insurance. 
 
Salvage and subrogation are two other common forms of recoveries for insurers. When an insurer 
pays an insured for a claim considered to be a total loss, the insurer acquires the rights to the 
damaged property. Salvage represents any amount that the insurer is able to collect from the sale 
of such damaged property. Subrogation refers to an insurer’s right to recover the amount of claim 
payment to a covered insured from a third-party responsible for the injury or damage. It is 
important for the actuary to understand the insurer’s practices with respect to both salvage and 
subrogation. The actuary needs to know whether the insurer records paid claims net or gross of 
these recoveries. Questions to consider include:  
 
 Are salvage and subrogation recoveries tracked separately from claim payments?  
 Are claim payments only recorded net of salvage or subrogation recoveries?  
 Is data for salvage and subrogation recoveries available to the actuary?  
 
Claim operations may separate the responsibilities associated with a claim, such that people other 
than those responsible for claim adjustment and settlement are involved with the investigation, 
analysis, and pursuit of potential recoveries. This may have implications to the data the actuary is 
using. 
 
 
33

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Reinsurance 
 
It is vital that the actuary understands the reinsurance program of the insurer and the effect of 
reinsurance on claims when conducting an analysis of ceded or net unpaid claims. Understanding 
the insurer’s reinsurance program may be dictated by statute.16  
 
Current and previous reinsurance plans and retentions directly affect an insurer’s estimates of 
unpaid claims. Therefore, the actuary may need to analyze claims both gross and net of 
reinsurance recoveries (i.e., both before and after taking into account the reinsurance recoveries). 
Some actuaries separately analyze gross claims and ceded claims (i.e., claims ceded to reinsurers) 
and then determine the estimate of net unpaid claims as the difference between estimated gross 
unpaid claims and estimated ceded unpaid claims. Other actuaries separately analyze gross claims 
and net claims (i.e., gross claims minus claims ceded to reinsurers) and then determine the 
estimate of ceded unpaid claims as the difference between estimated gross unpaid claims and 
estimated net unpaid claims. In either situation, the actuary must review the implied net or ceded 
unpaid claim estimate for reasonableness. For insurers who do not cede claims to a reinsurer, 
there is no difference between claims net and gross of reinsurance, and in these situations separate 
analyses are not necessary. 
 
One area that requires the actuary’s close attention is the treatment of ALAE in excess of loss 
reinsurance contracts. Generally, there are three possible treatments of ALAE: 
 
 Included with the claim amount in determining excess of loss coverage (which is the most 
common treatment today) 
 
 Not included in the coverage 
 
 Included on a pro rata basis; the ratio of the excess portion of the claim to the total claim 
amount determines coverage for ALAE 
                                                 
16 The requirements for actuaries providing Statements of Actuarial Opinion in both the U.S. and Canada demonstrate 
the importance for the actuary to understand the reinsurance program. According to the NAIC’s “Quarterly and Annual 
Statement Instructions for the year 2007, Property/Casualty,” the Appointed Actuary must provide “RELEVANT 
COMMENT” paragraphs to address the specific topic of reinsurance. The Instructions state: 
 
RELEVANT COMMENT paragraphs should address retroactive reinsurance, financial reinsurance 
and reinsurance collectibility. Before commenting on reinsurance collectibility, the actuary should 
solicit information from management on any actual collectibility problems, review ratings given to 
reinsurers by a recognized rating service, and examine Schedule F for the current year for 
indications of regulatory action or reinsurance recoverable on paid losses over 90 days past due. 
The comment should also reflect any other information the actuary has received from management 
or that is publicly available about the capability or willingness of reinsurers to pay claims. The 
actuary’s comments do not imply an opinion on the financial condition of any reinsurer. 
 
OSFI, the Canadian regulator for federally registered insurance companies, requires the Appointed Actuary’s Report 
(i.e., the report on policy liabilities) to contain a description of the insurer’s reinsurance arrangements during the 
experience period used in the report. Specifically, the Appointed Actuary is required to report on: 
 Types of arrangements 
 Significant terms and conditions 
 Order of application of treaties  
 Changes in the arrangements, including changes in retentions or limits 
 
Appointed Actuaries for Canadian insurers are also required to report on how any changes in reinsurance arrangements 
were taken into account in the development of unpaid claims for the insurer.
 
34

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
The treatment of ALAE will likely have an effect on data requirements, organization, and 
potentially the methodology selected for estimating unpaid claims. 
 
  
Exposure Data 
 
Some techniques used for estimating unpaid claims require a measure of the insurer’s exposure to 
claims. Earned premium may be the most common type of exposure used in estimation 
techniques for both insurers and reinsurers. Other types of exposures used by insurers may 
include: written premium, policies in force, policy limits by region (for the early estimation of 
unpaid claims related to a natural catastrophe), the number of vehicles insured (for personal 
automobile insurance), and payroll (for workers compensation).  
 
It is often valuable for actuaries to adjust historical premiums to current rate levels (i.e., on-level 
premiums). There are two ways in which actuaries typically derive on-level premiums. The first 
method essentially requires a re-rating of historical exposures at current rates. This is a computer-
intensive exercise and may not be feasible in all situations. A second method is to use a summary 
of rate level changes over the experience period and adjust the premiums in the aggregate for 
historical rate changes. There are many instances, however, when the actuary is unable to collect 
reliable information regarding rate changes and must use the premium data from the insurer on an 
unadjusted basis. 
 
Self-insured organizations do not generally collect premiums in the same way that an insurance 
company does. As a result, actuaries working with self-insurers generally use other readily 
observable and available exposure bases that they believe are closely related to the risk and thus 
the potential for claims.  
 
The following table summarizes, by line of business, examples of the types of exposures that 
actuaries often use for the analysis of self-insurers’ unpaid claims. 
 
Table 1 – Examples of Exposures for Self-Insurers 
Line of Insurance Exposure 
U.S. workers compensation Payroll 
Automobile liability Number of vehicles or miles driven 
General liability for public entities Population or operating expenditures 
General liability for corporations Sales or square footage 
Hospital professional liability Average occupied beds and outpatient visits 
Property Property values 
Crime Number of employees 
 
Exposures are important not only as an input to certain techniques used for estimating unpaid 
claims but also for evaluating and reconciling the results of the various techniques. We address 
this further in Part 3, Chapter 15. 
 
 
35

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Insurer Reporting and Understanding the Data 
 
We cannot emphasize strongly enough how critical it is for the actuary to fully understand the 
types of data generated by the insurer’s information systems. Different insurers, TPAs, IAs, or 
even different departments within the same organization may use the same term to mean different 
things. The actuary must know the true meaning of the types of claims data contained in the 
insurer’s claims reports and information systems.  
 
“Incurred loss” is an example of a term that the actuary may initially assume is used fairly 
consistently throughout the insurance industry. Upon closer examination, however, we see that 
incurred losses means different things to different people. To someone in the finance department, 
incurred losses usually refer to the transactional losses incurred during a defined period, usually a 
calendar (or fiscal) quarter or year. Thus, the incurred losses to someone in finance usually refer 
to the sum of payments made during the time period plus the change in total unpaid claims. 
Furthermore, finance departments usually include IBNR in their definition of incurred loss. To an 
actuary wanting to build an incurred claim development triangle, incurred losses are typically the 
cumulative claim payments through a valuation date plus the case outstanding at the same 
valuation date.
17 Some actuaries refer to these losses as case incurred or incurred on reported 
claims. We have also seen the term incurred losses used in TPA loss reports to refer to case 
outstanding only. To avoid any confusion, we use the term “reported claims” throughout this 
book to refer to case incurred losses. (Cumulative and incremental reported claims are introduced 
in Chapter 2 and are explored further in Chapter 5.)  
 
The terms “unpaid claims” and “reserves” are other examples of terminology that have many 
different meanings. In a report from the finance department, unpaid claims (or reserves) generally 
refer to the estimate of total unpaid claims including both case outstanding and IBNR. For the 
claims department, however, reports showing unpaid claims (or reserves) generally refer to case 
outstanding only. Some TPA reports use the term reserves in detailed claims listings to represent 
the total reported value of the claims (i.e., cumulative payments plus current case outstanding 
estimates). In this situation, the actuary would need to subtract cumulative paid claims from the 
reserves in order to determine the value of unpaid case. The actuary also needs to understand if 
the unpaid claim estimate is net or gross of deductibles or other types of recoveries, including 
salvage, subrogation, and reinsurance recoveries, and where in the claims process those 
recoveries are included. Finally, the actuary needs to know whether or not case outstanding 
include claim-related expenses. Some insurers record case outstanding and payments for claim-
related expenses separately from claim only case outstanding and payments; other insurers record 
expense payments separately (from claim payments) but do not carry case outstanding for 
expense. 
 
Another example of differences in the use of the term “reserves” can be found in the actuarial and 
accounting professions in South Africa and the United Kingdom. It is typical for accountants in 
these countries to distinguish between provisions (i.e., unpaid claim estimates) and reserves;  
actuaries usually use the term “reserves” to refer to the unpaid claim estimates and do not 
distinguish between different types of reserves. 
 
                                                 
17 In the U.S., the National Council on Compensation Insurance has Financial Data Calls that require 
incurred losses by accident year that include IBNR. Similarly, the incurred loss triangles in Schedule P of 
the U.S. statutory annual statement include IBNR. Hence, actuaries also prepare incurred loss triangles that 
do include IBNR. These provide further examples of why an actuary must seek a full understanding of the 
data prior to conducting any analysis or drawing any conclusions. 
36

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Even paid claims can mean different things to different people. The actuary must understand 
whether the paid claims are cumulative or incremental, whether they include or exclude claim-
related expenses (and what kind of claims expenses), and whether they are net or gross of 
recoveries.  
 
The actuary must also understand how the insurer’s system tracks claim counts. The number of 
claims is an important type of data for several techniques used to estimate unpaid claims. Claim 
counts are also critical to several diagnostic analyses that may be appropriate to undertake upon 
commencing an analysis of unpaid claims. Claim counts may also be important at the conclusion 
of the estimation process when the actuary evaluates and selects a final value for the unpaid claim 
estimate. The actuary needs to understand whether the insurer counts an automobile accident with 
payments for multiple coverages (e.g., bodily injury liability and physical damage) or to multiple 
parties (i.e., claimants) as one claim or multiple claims. Another important consideration for the 
actuary is how reopened claims are treated and whether they are considered a new claim. 
Reopened claims can be particularly important for some lines of business, such as U.S. workers 
compensation and accident benefits coverages. 
 
It is absolutely essential to the development of appropriate estimates of unpaid claims that 
actuaries clearly identify the specific data that exists and that they are requesting from the insurer, 
and that they fully understand the data that they receive. 
 
 
Verification of the Data 
 
An analysis based on incorrect or incomplete data can produce erroneous results. Therefore, 
while not requiring a formal audit of the data, actuarial standards of practice generally do require 
that actuaries establish suitable procedures to verify that the data utilized is reliable and sufficient 
for the intended purpose. This data review may include the following components: 
 
 Consistency with financial statement data – Can the actuary reconcile the data with financial 
statement data (that may be subject to some form of external audit)?  
 
 Consistency with prior data – Is the current data consistent with the data used in the prior 
analysis? If not, why? 
 
 Data reasonableness – Are there certain values that appear questionable, such as large 
negative paid claims or apparent inconsistencies between data elements? Questionable values 
are not always incorrect values, but the actuary should generally investigate questionable 
values before using them, especially if material to the analysis. 
 
 Data definitions – Does the actuary know how each of the data items is defined? The actuary 
should make a reasonable effort to determine the definition of each data element used in the 
analysis rather than assuming a certain definition given the label or name assigned to the 
element. As discussed earlier, similar labels do not always imply similar definitions. The 
actuary may also need to know what the default values are for certain items. If the default is 
used too often in the absence of true information for that element, the data element may not 
be sufficiently reliable for analysis purposes.   
 
37

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
While data verification is essential to any actuarial analysis, proper documentation of the verification 
process and findings should also be part of the process. This can include discussions with external 
auditors and, at times, reliance on their work regarding data verification. 
 
 
Organizing the Data 
 
Key Dates 
 
Having identified the types of data that actuaries use in determining unpaid claim estimates, we 
now discuss how to organize the data. Key dates for the organization of the claim data include: 
 
 Policy effective dates 
 Accident date 
 Report date 
 Accounting date 
 Valuation date 
 
The policy effective dates are the beginning and ending dates of the policy term (i.e., the period 
for which the policy triggered by the claim was effective). Some systems only capture the policy 
year (i.e., the year that the policy became effective). Reinsurers refer to the policy date as the 
underwriting date (or year).   
 
The accident date is generally the date that the accident or event occurred that triggered the 
potential policy coverage. Some systems only capture the accident year (i.e., the year that the 
triggering event occurred). This term can be ambiguous with regard to certain policies such as 
claims-made policies. With claims-made policies, the accident date may be defined as the date 
that the claim was reported as this is the date of the event that triggered coverage. Alternatively, 
some may define the accident date for a claims-made policy as the date that an injury occurred 
with the injury not covered by the policy unless the resulting claim was reported during the policy 
period.   
 
The report date is the date on which the claim was reported to the insurer and recorded in its 
claims system. Some databases may split this into two dates: report date and record date. There is 
even a potential for a third date – a notification date. The notification date is generally defined as 
the date that the insurer is put on notice that an event occurred that may result in a claim. For 
example, an insured motorist may notify their insurer that they got in an accident (but that they 
are not filing a claim); this is the notification date. A week later, the insurer may receive a claim 
from the other party in the accident; this is the report date, or the date on which the claim was 
reported. The following day, the claims department records the claim into their system; this is the 
record date. Notification dates are not commonly used in many actuarial analyses.   
  
The accounting date is the date that defines the group of claims for which liability may exist, 
namely all insured claims incurred on or before the accounting date. The accounting date may be 
any date selected for a statistical or financial reporting purpose, but generally must follow a date for 
which the history is frozen in time, such as a month, quarter, or year-end (with the latter two being 
the more common accounting dates used).   
 
An example may assist in understanding how claim activities relate to the accounting date. 
Assuming an accounting date for an occurrence-based policy of December 31, 2008, the total 
38

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
unpaid claim estimate as of this accounting date must provide for all incurred claims, whether 
reported or not, as of December 31, 2008. An insured loss that occurred on December 30, 2008, 
for a policy written on December 15, 2008, would be included in the estimate of unpaid claims 
for the accounting date December 31, 2008, regardless of when the claim is reported to the 
insurer. However, an insured loss that occurred on January 5, 2009, for the same policy that was 
written on December 15, 2008, would not be included in the unpaid claim estimate for the 
accounting date December 31, 2008, because this accident occurred after the accounting date. 
 
The valuation date is the date through which transactions are included in the database used in the 
evaluation of the liability, regardless of when the actuary performs the analysis. A valuation date 
may be prior to, coincident with, or subsequent to the accounting date. Actuaries typically use 
claims data at month-end, quarter-end, half-year-end, or year-end valuation dates.  
 
Again, examples may assist in understanding the concept of valuation date. To determine total 
unpaid claims at December 31, 2008, actuaries may use data valued as of December 31, 2008. In 
this example, the valuation date and the accounting date are the same. For some insurers, 
however, internal financial reporting requirements at year-end are such that the actuary does not 
have time to wait for the December 31, 2008 data to be available. In such circumstances, 
actuaries often use data at an earlier valuation date to estimate what the requirement for unpaid 
claims at the accounting date of December 31, 2008 will be. For example, some insurers used 
data as of September 30, 2008 to estimate unpaid claims as of December 31, 2008. In this 
example, the valuation date is September 30, 2008, and the accounting date is December 31, 
2008.  
 
In certain situations, an actuary may conduct an analysis of unpaid claims where the valuation 
date is later than the accounting date. For example, assume that the actuary wants to re-estimate 
what the claim liabilities were at December 31, 2006, taking into account the actual experience of 
2007 and 2008. The actuary can use a December 31, 2008 valuation date and thus include actual 
paid and reported claims experience through 2007 and 2008. When estimating the unpaid claims 
at December 31, 2006 (the accounting date), the actuary subtracts the actual payments at 
December 31, 2006 from the projected ultimate claims that he or she derives using data through 
December 31, 2008 (the valuation date).  
 
 
Aggregation by Calendar Year 
 
Calendar year data is transactional data.  For example, calendar year 2008 paid claims refer to 
the claim payments made by the insurer between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2008. 
Similarly, calendar year 2008 reported claims are the 2008 payments plus the change in case 
outstanding (ending case outstanding at December 31, 2008 minus beginning case outstanding at 
January 1, 2008
18). Reported claim counts for the 2008 calendar year represent those claim counts 
reported during the January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008 period; and closed claim counts 
represent the number of claims closed during the year.  
 
The primary uses of calendar year data for the actuary are the aggregation of exposures and 
diagnostic testing when analyzing accident year claims data. Calendar year 2008 written premium 
is simply the sum of all written premium reported/recorded in the accounting systems during  
                                                 
18 The actual accounting equation uses ending case outstanding at December 31, 2007, but this is generally 
synonymous with beginning reserves at January 1, 2008. 
39

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
2008. The following formula defines calendar year earned premium: 
 
Written Premium + Beginning Unearned Premium Reserve – Ending Unearned Premium Reserve 
 
 
Advantages of Calendar Year Data 
 
A major advantage of calendar year data is that there is no future development. The value remains 
fixed and does not change as time goes by as do claims and exposures aggregated based on 
accident year, policy year, and even report year bases. Another advantage of calendar year data is 
that it is readily available. Most insurers conduct financial reporting on a calendar year basis, thus 
data by calendar year is typically easily accessible to the actuary.  
 
 
Disadvantages of Calendar Year Data 
 
The fixed nature of calendar year data also presents a disadvantage. The inability to address the 
critical issue of development is a disadvantage of calendar year statistics. Very few techniques for 
estimating unpaid claims are based on calendar year claims. Calendar year exposures, on the 
other hand, are frequently used in estimation techniques along with accident year claims. 
 
 
Aggregation by Accident Year
 
 
Aggregation by accident year is, by far, the most common grouping of claims data for the 
actuarial analysis of unpaid claims. Accident year data refers to claims grouped according to the 
date of occurrence (i.e., the accident date or the coverage triggering event). For example, accident 
year 2008 consists of all claims with an occurrence date in 2008.  
 
Caution must be exercised when working with self-insurers’ accident year data as their fiscal year 
ends may not coincide with the calendar year-end. For example, accident year 2008 may be 
defined to coincide with a self-insurer’s August 1, 2007 to July 31, 2008 fiscal year or may 
include claims occurring during the January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008 calendar year period. 
Again, the important message for the actuary is to understand the data, including how it is 
organized and presented. 
 
Insurers compile claims data according to a variety of accident periods including accident month, 
accident quarter, accident half-year, and accident year. The insurer groups together all claims 
with accident dates within the particular time period. 
 
Various financial reporting schedules and statistical organizations for insurers in the U.S. and 
Canada require claim information by accident year. In some areas, such as Lloyds of London, 
financial reporting by underwriting year is more common than accident year. 
 
As indicated previously, actuaries often use calendar year exposures with accident year claims. 
Calendar year earned premiums provide an approximate matching of the claims that occur during 
the year with the insurance premiums earned by an insurer during the year in which the insurance 
coverage is effective. We will see below that claims and exposures aggregated by policy year 
provide an exact match. For self-insurers, however, calendar year exposures do represent an exact 
match with the accident year claims. 
40

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Advantages of Accident Year Aggregation 
 
In many respects, accident year aggregation has become the accepted norm for P&C insurers in 
the U.S. and Canada. Accident year grouping is easy to achieve and easy to understand. It 
represents claims occurring over a shorter time frame than for the policy year or underwriting 
year aggregation, implying that ultimate accident year claims should become reliably estimable 
sooner than those for a policy or underwriting year. There are numerous industry benchmarks 
available to actuaries based on accident year experience. Finally, tracking claims by accident year 
is valuable when there is change due to economic or regulatory forces (such as inflation or law 
amendments) or major claim events (such as atypical weather or a major catastrophe) which can 
influence claims experience.  
 
 
Disadvantages of Accident Year Aggregation 
 
The most significant disadvantage of accident year aggregation is the potential mismatch between 
claims and exposures for insurers. It also includes claims from policies underwritten and priced at 
more varied times than policy or underwriting year aggregation. For self-insureds with high 
deductibles, accident year data can mask changes in retention levels and/or changes in insurers 
that could have an effect on claim development patterns. 
 
 
Aggregation by Policy Year or Underwriting Year  
 
Claims can also be grouped according to policy year. For policy year data, the actuary sorts 
claims according to the year in which the policy was written. Policy year aggregation directly 
matches the premiums and claims arising from a given block of policies.19 The grouping of 
claims by policy year for insurers is similar to the grouping of claims by underwriting year 
frequently used by reinsurers. Underwriting year data, which is frequently used by reinsurers, 
refers to claims data grouped by the year in which the reinsurance policy became effective.  
 
Claims arising from a policy year or underwriting year can extend over a 24-month calendar 
period if the policy is of a 12-month duration. For example, policy year 2008 refers to all policies 
with beginning effective dates between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2008. For annual 
policies with a January 1, 2008 beginning effective date, covered claims will have accident dates 
between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2008. However, claims for annual policies with a 
beginning effective date of December 31, 2008 will have occurrence dates between December 31, 
2008 and December 30, 2009.  
 
 
                                                 
19 The actuary should be aware of the insurer’s treatment of multi-year policies. Insurers differ in their 
practices as to how such policies are coded in the information systems. Some insurers split the single multi-
year policy into annual pieces and code this type of policy as multiple annual policies. Other insurers may 
follow different practices. The important point is that the actuary must understand the process for recording 
premium and claims associated with multi-year policies (to the extent such policies exist in the insurer’s 
portfolio). 
41

=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Advantages of Policy Year Aggregation 
 
The greatest advantage of policy year (or underwriting year) aggregation is a true match between 
claims and exposures (e.g., premiums). Policy year experience can be very important when 
underwriting or pricing changes occur, such as a shift from full coverage to large deductible 
policies, a new emphasis on certain classes of business, or an increase/decrease in the price 
charged leading to a change in expected claim ratios and possibly a change in the type of 
policyholder insured. Policy year aggregation is particularly useful for self-insureds where only 
one policy may apply. 
 
 
Disadvantages of Policy Year Aggregation 
 
The primary disadvantage of policy year (or underwriting year) aggregation is the extended time 
frame. As seen in our previous example, a policy year can extend over a 24-month time period, 
generally resulting in a longer time until all the claims are reported and a longer time until the 
ultimate claims can be reliably estimated. Policy year data can also make it difficult to understand 
and isolate the effect of a single large event, such as a major catastrophe or a major court ruling, 
which changes how the insurance contracts are interpreted. 
 
 
Aggregation by Report Year 
 
For some lines of insurance, such as medical malpractice, products liability, errors and omission, 
and directors’ and officers’ liability, coverage may be dependent on the date on which the claim 
is reported to the insurer (i.e., claims-made coverage). For these lines of business, actuaries often 
prefer to use report year data for developing estimates of unpaid claims. Report year refers to 
grouping claims according to the date of report to the insurer. For example, report year 2008 
consists of all claims with report dates in 2008. Actuaries use this grouping to estimate the 
ultimate value of known claims. Aggregation of claims by report year can also be used to test the 
adequacy of case outstanding on known claims over time. 
 
Once again, we highlight that the actuary must understand the systems and procedures for the 
insurer. For some insurers, the accident date is the date that triggers coverage, which may be the 
claim report date for some claims-made policies. For some claims-made policies, the notification 
date rather than the report date triggers the coverage. Also, some claims-made policies have 
extended reporting endorsements that may not be coded as a new policy, and hence development 
beyond 12 months may be possible even for annual policies. An actuary must not only determine 
how to aggregate the data but must truly understand how the data enters and is tracked in the 
insurer’s systems. 
 
 
Advantages of Report Year Aggregation 
 
A unique feature of report year claims data is that the number of claims is fixed at the close of the 
year (other than for claims reported but not recorded). As a result, a report year approach will 
generally result in more stable data and more readily determinable development patterns than an 
accident year approach in which the number of claims is subject to change at each successive 
valuation. The report year approach substitutes a known quantity (i.e., the number of reported 
claim counts) for an estimate.  
42

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 3 - Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims 
 
 
Disadvantages of Report Year Aggregation 
 
Estimation techniques based on claims aggregated by report year only measure development on 
known claims and not pure IBNR; and pure IBNR is frequently the more difficult part of the total 
unpaid claims estimate to determine. Other methods for developing unpaid claim estimates are 
required to derive the pure IBNR when using report year data.
43

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 – MEETING WITH MANAGEMENT 
 
 
This chapter discusses the interaction between the actuary and those involved with the processes 
that underlie the data. The dynamics of this interaction will frequently vary based on whether the 
actuary is an employee of the insurer or an outside consultant. For example, while an actuarial 
employee may be able to just call or walk over to meet those involved in the insurer’s claims 
operation when a question arises, a consultant may have to go through a more formal process, 
such as scheduling a meeting with company management involved in the relevant processes. To 
simplify the discussion, this chapter is written predominately from the perspective of an outside 
consultant, using the term management when referring to discussions with those involved in the 
underlying claims and underwriting processes. 
 
 
Understanding the Environment 
 
Before applying mathematical models to develop estimates of unpaid claims for an insurer, the 
actuary must first understand the dynamics of the environment in which the insurer operates. This 
includes both the specific circumstances existing within the insurer’s organization as well as the 
economic, social, legal, and regulatory environments that will also affect the liabilities of the 
insurer. Without a sound understanding of the environment, both internal and external to the 
insurer, an actuary may not be able to correctly interpret patterns and changes in the data.  
 
There are countless changes that influence the claims experience of an insurer. Claims reporting 
and payment patterns, frequency, and severity can all be altered by changes in: 
 
 Classes of business written or geographical focus 
 
 Policy provisions such as policy limits and deductibles 
 
 Reinsurance arrangements including limits and attachment points 
 
 Claims management philosophy that often occur when managerial changes occur 
 
 Claims processing lags that may occur when a new technology is implemented within an 
insurer or department staffing is disrupted, such as in the event of a merger or a major 
catastrophe that temporarily overwhelms the claim department’s capacity 
 
 Legal and social environment such as the introduction of no-fault automobile insurance, 
back-logs in the court systems, new court rulings, and implementation of tort reform
20 
measures  
 
 Economic environment such as an increase in the inflation rate or a decrease in the interest rate 
 
                                                 
20 Tort reform refers to legislation designed to reduce liability costs through limits on various kinds of 
damages and/or through modification of liability rules. 
 
 
44

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
The collection of data and information does not necessarily proceed in a sequential order as 
presented in this text. Not all actuaries start by gathering data, then meeting with management, and 
end with conducting an actuarial diagnostic review of the data. Generally the information gathering 
is an ongoing process with much back-and-forth dialogue between the actuary and management.  
 
For actuaries responsible for estimating unpaid claims who work as employees of an insurer, the 
information gathering process will likely be continual and ongoing. Conversations with colleagues 
in various departments (such as claims, underwriting, reinsurance, and systems) may take place on 
a routine basis. These conversations may be formal through regular monthly or quarterly meetings, 
or informal and unscheduled. For actuaries who work as independent consultants, the 
communication with the insurer’s employees in various departments tends to be less frequent. Often 
the consultant will schedule formal meetings at least once a year to review the departments’ key 
activities that can have a significant influence on the estimation of unpaid claims. 
 
There is no one right or wrong approach for the actuary to collect data and information. What is 
critically important, however, is that the process includes both a review of quantitative data and 
discussions with key members of the insurer’s claim and underwriting departments. Both of these 
components will assist the actuary in selecting the appropriate techniques for estimating unpaid 
claims. Discussions with management will help the actuary understand anomalies in the data. The 
review of the data will help direct the actuary to ask management specific questions concerning issues 
that manifest themselves in the data. Such questions will help the actuary gain a better understanding 
of the organization and the specific circumstances of particular books of business, and thus guide the 
actuary to the most appropriate methodologies for determining unpaid claim estimates.  
 
In 1977, J.R. Berquist and R.E. Sherman published the paper “Loss Reserve Adequacy Testing: A 
Comprehensive, Systematic Approach.”
21 Among the paper’s many valuable contributions was an 
appendix with a list of possible interview questions for the various departments of an insurer. 
Actuaries throughout the world have used this list as part of the annual information gathering 
process in support of the analyses of unpaid claims. In a session entitled “Updating the Berquist-
Sherman Paper – Thirty Years Later” presented at the CAS 2007 Casualty Loss Reserving 
Seminar, Mr. Sherman suggested some additional questions for department executives. We 
include below a copy of Appendix B from the original Berquist and Sherman paper, updated to 
incorporate the additional questions presented in 2007.  
 
It is important to recognize that the following questions are presented primarily from the 
perspective of a consultant interviewing insurance company management. Some changes to these 
questions would be required for actuaries working with self-insurers as well as for internal 
actuaries working at insurance and reinsurance companies. 
 
 
Sample Questions for Department Executives 
 
Questions for a Claims Executive 
 
1) What specific objectives and guidelines does your department have in setting unpaid case? 
Are unpaid case established on the basis of what it would cost to settle the case today, or 
has a provision for inflation between now and the estimated time of settlement of the claim 
been included in the case outstanding? 
 
                                                 
21 PCAS, 1977. 
45

=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
2) Have there been any significant changes in the guidelines for setting and reviewing unpaid 
case during the last five years? 
 
3) Have there been any changes in the definitions of or rules for establishing bulk or formula 
reserves for reported claims in the last five years? 
 
4) Are any special procedures or guidelines applied in the reserving of large or catastrophic 
claims? If so, please describe. 
 
5) Has the size of the caseload of the average claims adjuster changed significantly in the past 
several years? 
 
6) When, in the sequence of events, is a claim file established? 
 
7) Is a claim file established for each claimant or for each accident? What procedures are 
followed when there are multiple claimants from the same accident? Is a claim file 
established for each coverage or for all coverages combined? 
 
8) What procedures are followed in recording reopened claims? Are such claims coded to the 
report date of the original claim or to the date of reopening? How will the reopening of a 
claim affect aggregate data for paid, open or reported claims and paid, outstanding or 
incurred losses? 
 
9) Have there been any noticeable shifts in the reporting or non-reporting of very small or 
trivial claims? In the procedures for the recording of such? 
 
10) Has there been any shift in emphasis in settling large versus small claims? In the relative 
proportion of such claims? In attitudes in adjusting such claims? 
 
11) Have there been any changes in the guidelines on when to close a claim? For example, is a 
P.D. (property damage) claim kept open until the associated B.I. (bodily injury) claim is 
closed, or only until the P.D. portion is settled? 
 
12) Have there been any noticeable changes in the rate of settlement of claims recently? 
 
13) Has there been any shift from the employment of company adjusters to independent 
adjusters? Or vice versa? If so, how has this affected the operations of the claims 
department? 
 
14) Has there been any change in the timing of the payment of allocated loss adjustment 
expenses? For example, are such payments made as these expenses are accrued (or 
incurred) or when the claim is closed?  
 
15) Has there been any change in the definition and limit for one-shot or fast-track claims in 
recent years? What is that limit? 
 
16) What safeguards against fraudulent claims are now employed? Are any special procedures 
followed in the event of the filing of apparently questionable or non-meritorious claims? 
Have these safeguards changed in recent years? 
 
46

=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
17) Have there been any shifts toward (or away from) the more vigorous defense of suits in 
recent years? 
 
18) Could you provide copies of all bulletins to the field issued in the last five years in which 
details of the changes in claims procedures are provided? 
 
19) Could you provide copies of recent claim audits? 
 
20) For workers compensation, what mortality table was used (year and general population or 
disabled lives table) to set the unpaid case for permanently disabled claimants? 
 
21) For large open claims, has there been any revision in the reserve since the latest evaluation 
date of the claims experience? 
 
22) Are unpaid case set at an expected level, the most likely settlement amount, or the minimum 
possible amount (or some other standard)? 
 
 
Questions for an Underwriting Executive
 
 
1) What significant changes have occurred in your company’s book of business and mix of 
business in the past five to seven years? How are the risks insured today different from 
those of the past? 
 
2) Do you underwrite any large risks which are not characteristic of your general book of 
business? 
 
3) Have any significant changes occurred in your underwriting guidelines in recent years? 
 
4) Has the proportion of business attributable to excess coverages for self-insurers changed in 
recent years? Can a distribution of such business be obtained by line, retention limit, class, 
etc.? Is a record of self-insured losses and claims available? 
 
5) For how many different programs or types of risk are premium and claims experience 
tracked and compiled into claim ratio runs? 
 
6) Are there any available summaries of the details of excess policies, such as attachment 
points, exclusions, per occurrence, sunset clauses, aggregate caps, etc.? 
 
7) What is the frequency of availability of such experience summaries? How far back are these 
available? 
 
8) How are the new programs priced? If you are relying on another insurer’s filings, how 
similar are the underlying books of business?
 
 
 
47

=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
Questions for a Data Processing or Accounting Executive 
 
1) Has there been any change in the date on which the books are closed for the quarter? the 
year?  
 
2) How are claim payments handled for claims which have already been paid, but which have 
not yet been processed to the point where they can be allocated to accident quarter? Are 
they excluded from the loss history until they are allocated to accident quarter or are they 
loaded into an arbitrary quarter? 
 
3) Have new data processing systems been implemented in recent years? Have they had a 
significant impact on the rate of processing claims or on the length of time required from 
the reporting to the recording of a claim? 
 
4) To what extent have each of the data sources supplied been crosschecked and audited for 
accuracy and for balancing to overall company statistics? Comment on the degree of 
accuracy with which each kind of statistic has been properly allocated to accident quarter, to 
line of business, to size of loss, etc. 
 
5) Have there been any changes in coding procedures which would affect the data supplied? 
 
6) Would it be possible for partial payments to exceed the case outstanding on a claim? In 
such an event, what adjustments are made? Are unpaid case taken down by the amount of 
partial payments? 
 
7) How far back can the claims data be actively re-compiled by various key criteria? 
 
8) What data elements are available for each claim? For each risk? 
 
9) By what key criteria could the historical claims data be freshly compiled? Examples of 
criteria: size of loss breakdowns, type of claim breakdowns (e.g., liability vs. property for 
commercial multi-peril or homeowner multi-peril), separate compilations by policy limit, or 
deductible, or type of claim, or state. 
 
10) Can data be compiled either by claimant or occurrence, if multiple claims are established 
for one occurrence? 
 
 
Questions for Actuaries Specializing in Ratemaking 
 
1) Have there been any changes in company operations or procedures which have caused you 
to depart from standard ratemaking procedures? If so, please describe those changes and 
how they were treated. 
 
2) What data which is currently used for ratemaking purposes could also be used in testing 
unpaid claims? 
 
3) Have you noted any significant shifts in the composition of business by type of risk or type 
of claim within the past several years? 
 
48

=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
4) Do you have any of the following sources of information which may be of value in reserve 
testing: 
 
a) External economic indices, 
b) Combined claims data for several companies (e.g., data obtainable from bureau rate 
filings), 
c) Special rating bureau studies, 
d) Changes in state laws or regulations, and 
e) Size of loss or cause of loss studies? 
 
5) Could we obtain copies of recent rate filings? 
 
6) Were there any changes in statues, court decisions, extent of coverage that necessitated 
some reflection in the rate analysis? 
 
7) How are new programs priced? If you are relying on another insurer’s filing, how similar 
are the underlying books of business? 
 
 
Questions for In-House Actuaries 
 
1) Could we obtain copies of any and all actuarial studies done by consultants, auditors or 
internal actuaries? 
 
2) What areas of disagreement are there between these different studies? 
 
3) What specific background information did you take into account in making your selections? 
 
 
Additional Questions 
 
In addition to the questions identified in the Berquist and Sherman paper, we recommend that the 
following questions be added for meetings with senior management of the insurer. 
 
 
Questions for Those Managing Reinsurance 
 
 Please provide details of reinsurance treaties and of reinsurance agreements in general, 
regarding both assumed and ceded business. 
 
 Please provide details of all reinsurance ceded treaties including: 
 
 Retention level or quota share percentage 
 
 Reinsurers involved including participation 
 
 Details of any sliding scale premium, commission, or profit commission including 
currently booked amounts 
 
 Any problems or delays encountered in collecting reinsurance 
49

=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 4 - Meeting with Management 
 
 
 Please provide details of any internal or sister company reinsurance agreements that were not 
included above (cover notes, relevant amounts, and by-line breakdowns). 
 
 Have you secured the continuation of your reinsurance program for next year?  If so, under 
what terms? 
 
 
Questions for Senior Management 
 
Please provide a brief description of the company’s operations including: 
 
 An organization chart with recent changes highlighted 
 Details of ownership 
 Description of types of business written including all special programs 
 Description of marketing (i.e., direct writer, independent agent, etc.) 
 
50

=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
CHAPTER 5 – THE DEVELOPMENT TRIANGLE 
 
 
A development triangle is a table that shows changes in the value of various cohorts over time.  
For example, we create a table that summarizes how the cumulative amounts paid by insurance 
companies (the values) for claims arising out of automobile accidents that occurred during 2006, 
2007, and 2008 (the cohorts) increased from year-end 2006 to year-end 2007 to year-end 2008.   
 
Table 1 – Paid Claims and Expenses ($US Billions)  
by Year-End Accounting Date 
Accident Year Year-end 2006  Year-end 2007 Year-end 2008 
2006 100 150 170 
2007  110 161 
2008   115 
 
We define the development for any of these cohorts (i.e., the accident year claims mentioned 
above) as the change in the value for the cohort over time. For example, the paid claims and 
expense for accident year 2006 in the above triangle were $100 billion through year-end 2006, 
and increased to $150 billion through year-end 2007; the change from $100 billion to $150 billion 
is the development in this quantity.   
 
Actuaries are frequently interested in the typical development for a cohort over time. This is 
generally easier to observe by looking at the age (or maturity) of the cohort rather than the 
accounting date for the cohort. The above triangle reformatted to reflect this approach is 
presented in Table 2 below.  
 
Table 2 – Paid Claims and Expenses ($US Billions) 
 by Age
Accident Year 12 Months 24 Months 36 Months 
2006 100 150 170 
2007 110 161  
2008 115   
 
The age (or maturity) is generally measured in terms of the time from the start of the cohort 
period. For example, the age of the 2006 accident year valued at year-end 2006 is 12 months 
(from the start of the accident year). Similarly, the age of the 2006 accident year valued at year-
end 2007 is 24 months (from the start of the accident year).  
 
Both of the above formatting approaches result in data in a triangle shape, hence the term 
development triangle. However, in the second triangle it is easier to see how the volume (or scale) 
of the accident year cohort changes from one accident year to the next and how the value of 
cumulative paid claims for an accident year changes from age to age.  
 
We can show and analyze many different values through the use of development triangles, 
including but not limited to: reported claims, paid claims, claim-related expenses, and reported 
claim counts.  
51

=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
Development can be either positive or negative. For example, the number of claims associated 
with claims occurring in a particular accident year will often increase from one valuation point to 
another until all claims are reported. There are circumstances, however, when the number of 
claims decreases from one valuation point to another. In Chapter 11, we use an example with data 
for private passenger automobile collision coverage organized by accident half-year. The claim 
count data excludes claims closed without payment. In this particular example, we will observe 
that the number of claims decreases at successive valuations. Reported claim development can 
also show downward patterns if the insurer settles claims for a lower value than the case 
outstanding estimate or if the insurer includes recoveries with the claims data. 
 
The development triangle is one of the most common tools that actuaries use to organize data in 
order to identify and analyze patterns in historical data. Actuaries use development triangles to 
quantify historical development. Development patterns are critical inputs to many techniques 
used to estimate unpaid claims. In this chapter, we demonstrate how to build development 
triangles for paid claims, case outstanding, reported claims, and reported claim counts. We use 
payment and case outstanding information for a sample of 15 claims over a four-year time 
horizon. Our example is not representative of any particular line of insurance. Its sole purpose is 
to demonstrate how to build development triangles based on detailed claims information. 
 
 
Rows, Diagonals, and Columns 
 
Table 3 contains a sample reported claim triangle for an organization that began operations in 
2005.  
 
Table 3 – Reported Claim Triangle 
Accident Reported Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 
2005 1,500 2,420 2,720 3,020 
2006 1,150 1,840 2,070  
2007 1,650 2,640   
2008 1,740    
 
There are three important dimensions in a development triangle: 
 
 Rows 
 Diagonals 
 Columns 
 
Each row in the triangle above represents one accident year. As we discuss in Chapter 3, 
organizing data by accident year refers to grouping claims according to the date of occurrence 
(i.e., the accident date). By grouping the data into accident years, each row consists of a fixed 
group of claims. In our example, the reported claim development triangle includes the reported 
claims for accident years 2005 through 2008. The first row of the triangle represents claims 
occurring in 2005; the second row, claims occurring in 2006; the third row, claims occurring in 
2007; and the final row, claims occurring in 2008. 
 
52

=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
Each subsequent diagonal in the reported claim triangle represents a successive valuation date. 
There are four diagonals in the triangle shown in Table 3: 
 
 The first diagonal (which is a single point) is the December 31, 2005 valuation  
 The next diagonal is the December 31, 2006 valuation for accident years 2005 and 2006 
 The next diagonal is the December 31, 2007 valuation for accident years 2005 through 2007 
 The last diagonal is the December 31, 2008 valuation for accident years 2005 through 2008 
 
The diagonals and corresponding valuation dates are shown pictorially in Table 4 below. (CY in 
the diagram below refers to calendar year.) 
 
Table 4 – Diagonals of the Reported Claim Triangle Example 
 
Age (months)
Acc Year 12 24 36 48
2005  CY 2005
CY 2006
CY 2007
CY 2008
2006  CY 2006
CY 2007
CY 2008
2007  CY 2007
CY 2008
2008  CY 2008
 
 
The first diagonal, which starts in the upper left corner of the triangle, is at the December 31, 
2005 valuation date and represents accident year 2005 at 12 months of maturity. Again, the 
standard nomenclature is to count from the beginning of the accident year to the valuation date. 
Thus accident year 2005, which begins on January 1, 2005, is 12 months old at December 31, 
2005.  
 
The second diagonal in the triangle is at the December 31, 2006 valuation date. At December 31, 
2006, accident year 2005 is 24 months old and accident year 2006 is 12 months old. To determine 
these ages, we again count the number of months from the beginning of each accident year (i.e., 
January 1, 2005 and January 1, 2006) to the valuation date of December 31, 2006. The third 
diagonal continues in a similar manner. 
 
Concluding our example, the last diagonal of the triangle, at a valuation date of December 31, 
2008, represent claims for accident year: 
 
 2005 as of 48 months (counting from the start of the accident year, January 1, 2005, to the 
valuation date of December 31, 2008) 
 
 2006 as of 36 months (counting from January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2008) 
 
 2007 as of 24 months (counting from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2008) 
 
 2008 as of 12 months (counting from January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008) 
53

=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
Each column in the claim development triangle represents an age (or maturity) and is directly 
related to the combination of accident year (row) and valuation date (diagonal) used to create the 
triangle. In our example, we present accident year data using annual valuations, and thus the ages 
in the columns are 12 months, 24 months, 36 months, and 48 months. Different valuations can be 
used by the actuary (e.g., 6 months, 12 months, 18 months, etc.). 
 
 
Alternative Format of Development Triangles 
 
Throughout this book, we present development triangles with the rows corresponding to the 
experience period22 (e.g., accident year in the previous example) and the columns representing the 
maturity ages.23 This is by far the most common presentation of development triangles. Some 
insurers, however, reverse this orientation and present accident years (or policy or underwriting 
years) as the columns and the maturity ages as the rows. Prior to commencing the analysis of 
unpaid claims, it is important for the actuary to understand the way in which the insurer 
aggregates the data and reports the data in the development triangle.
 
 
 
Detailed Example of Claim Development Triangles 
 
Understanding the Data 
 
To better understand how to create a claim development triangle, we turn our attention to the 
individual claims detail that underlies the reported claim triangle shown in Table 3. In our 
example, we demonstrate how to integrate the claims amounts shown in the claims listing below 
into the cells of the various claim development triangles. (In the table below, we use the 
abbreviation case O/S to mean case outstanding.) 
 
Table 5 – Detailed Example – Claims Transaction Data 
   2005 Transactions 2006 Transactions 2007 Transactions 2008 Transactions 
 
Claim 
ID 
 
Accident 
Date 
 
Report 
Date 
 
Total 
Payments 
Ending 
Case 
O/S 
 
Total 
Payments 
Ending 
Case 
O/S 
 
Total 
Payments 
Ending 
Case 
O/S 
 
Total 
Payments 
Ending 
Case 
O/S 
1 Jan-5-05 Feb-1-05 400 200 220 0 0 0 0 0 
2 May-4-05 May-15-05 200 300 200 0 0 0 0 0 
3 Aug-20-05 Dec-15-05 0 400 200 200 300 0 0 0 
4 Oct-28-05 May-15-06   0 1,000 0 1,200 300 1,200 
           
5 Mar-3-06 Jul-1-06   260 190 190 0 0 0 
6 Sep-18-06 Oct-2-06   200 500 0 500 230 270 
7 Dec-1-06 Feb-15-07     270 420 0 650 
           
8 Mar-1-07 Apr-1-07     200 200 200 0 
9 Jun-15-07 Sep-9-07     460 390 0 390 
10 Sep-30-07 Oct-20-07     0 400 400 400 
11 Dec-12-07 Mar-10-08       60 530 
           
12 Apr-12-08 Jun-18-08       400 200 
13 May-28-08 Jul-23-08       300 300 
14 Nov-12-08 Dec-5-08       0 540 
15 Oct-15-08 Feb-2-09         
 
                                                 
22 Also referred to as “origin period.” 
 
23 Also referred to as “development periods.” 
54

=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
Table 5 contains detailed information for 15 claims that occurred in accident years 2005 through 
2008. The first column of the table is a claim ID number. The next two columns are the accident 
date and the report date. The accident date is necessary for determining the appropriate row of the 
triangle. The report date is important for determining when the information about the claim first 
enters the triangle. The table includes claim payments made in the year and the ending case 
outstanding value. It is important to recognize that the claim payments in the table do not 
represent the cumulative paid values but the transactional payments made during the year. The 
case outstanding values contained in the table are the ending case outstanding values; they are not 
the transactional change in case outstanding that occurred during the year.  
 
It is absolutely critical when constructing claim development triangles that the actuary fully 
understands the data available. The information systems used by different insurers vary 
tremendously. Thus, the types and format of data available to actuaries vary significantly from 
insurer to insurer. Defining and understanding the available data must be the first step in any 
actuarial analysis.  
 
 
Step-by-Step Example 
 
We now demonstrate, step by step, how to create the paid claims, case outstanding, reported 
claims, and reported claim count triangles. We begin with the incremental paid claim 
development triangle. Table 6 below summarizes the payment transactions presented in our 
example. This table is simply an excerpt of Table 5. 
 
Table 6 - Detailed Example – Claims Transaction Paid Claims Data 
   Incremental Payments in Calendar Year 
Claim 
ID 
Accident 
Date 
Report 
Date 
 
2005 
 
2006 
 
2007 
 
2008 
1 Jan-5-05 Feb-1-05 400 220 0 0 
2 May-4-05 May-15-05 200 200 0 0 
3 Aug-20-05 Dec-15-05 0 200 300 0 
4 Oct-28-05 May-15-06  0 0 300 
       
5 Mar-3-06 Jul-1-06  260 190 0 
6 Sep-18-06 Oct-2-06  200 0 230 
7 Dec-1-06 Feb-15-07   270 0 
       
8 Mar-1-07 Apr-1-07   200 200 
9 Jun-15-07 Sep-9-07   460 0 
10 Sep-30-07 Oct-20-07   0 400 
11 Dec-12-07 Mar-10-08    60 
       
12 Apr-12-08 Jun-18-08    400 
13 May-28-08 Jul-23-08    300 
14 Nov-12-08 Dec-5-08    0 
15 Oct-15-08 Feb-2-09     
 
Using the above data, we create a triangle of incremental payments showing the amounts paid in 
each 12-month calendar period for the fixed group of claims in our example. For claims that 
occurred during 2005, the insurer paid a total of $600 during the first 12-month period (2005), 
$620 during the second 12-month period (2006), and $300 in each of the following two 12-month 
55

=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
periods (2007 and 2008). For claims that occurred during 2006, the insurer paid $460 during 2006 
and 2007 and $230 during 2008. We use the same approach for each accident year grouping of 
claims to derive the following triangle of incremental paid claims. 
 
Table 7 – Incremental Paid Claim Triangle 
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 
2005 600 620 300 300 
2006 460 460 230  
2007 660 660   
2008 700    
 
The incremental paid claim triangle is important for diagnostic purposes and for some frequency-
severity techniques. However, actuaries tend to use cumulative paid claim triangles more often 
than incremental paid claim triangles. We can readily create the following cumulative paid claim 
triangle from the incremental paid claim triangle.  
 
Table 8 – Cumulative Paid Claim Triangle 
Accident Cumulative Paid Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 
2005 600 1,220 1,520 1,820 
2006 460 920 1,150  
2007 660 1,320   
2008 700    
 
We derive the cumulative paid claim triangle by simple arithmetic from the incremental paid claim 
triangle. The first column in both triangles, age 12 months, is the same for both paid claim triangles 
(i.e., incremental paid claims are equal to cumulative paid claims at the first maturity age). To 
derive the second column of the cumulative paid claim triangle, we add the second column (i.e., age 
24 months) of the incremental paid claim triangle to the first column of either triangle. The 
cumulative paid claims at 36 months are equal to the cumulative paid claims at 24 months plus the 
incremental paid claims at 36 months. Finally, the cumulative paid claims at 48 months are equal to 
the cumulative paid claims at 36 months plus the incremental paid claims at 48 months.  
 
Before moving on to the other development triangles (e.g., case outstanding, reported claims, and 
reported claim counts), we stop to explain where the payments in the original summary appear in 
the cumulative paid claim development triangle. We now describe how to create numerous cells 
of the cumulative paid claim triangle using the original detailed paid claims information 
summarized in Table 6 as an alternative to simply cumulating the incremental paid triangle. 
 
The first cell of the accident year cumulative paid claim development triangle is accident year 2005 
at a valuation date of December 31, 2005. Actuaries refer to this point in the triangle as accident 
year 2005 at 12 months. In the claims detail presented in Table 6, we note that there are four claims 
that occurred in 2005 (Claim IDs 1, 2, 3, and 4). The first three claims (Claim IDs 1, 2, and 3) all 
occurred and were reported to the insurer during 2005. The last claim (Claim ID 4) occurred on 
October 28, 2005, but was only reported on May 15, 2006. Thus, when we calculate the value of 
accident year 2005 paid claims at 12 months, we do not include Claim ID 4 since this claim was not 
56

=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
yet reported as of the December 31, 2005 valuation date. We also note that Claim ID 3 did not have 
any payments as of December 31, 2005. Thus, the $600 paid claims which appear in the first cell of 
the triangle represent payments for Claim IDs 1 and 2 during the year 2005. 
 
We now construct the second diagonal of the cumulative paid claim triangle; this is the 
December 31, 2006 valuation. The second diagonal of the triangle contains two points: accident 
year 2005 at 24 months and accident year 2006 at 12 months. Continuing along the first row, we 
first calculate the value of paid claims at 24 months for accident year 2005. Total payments made 
during 2006 for Claim IDs 1, 2, 3, and 4 are $620 ($220 + $200 + $200 + $0). Cumulative claim 
payments for accident year 2005 through December 31, 2006 are equal to the sum of the 
payments made during 2005 and the payments made during 2006 for a total of $1,220. 
 
The second point along the December 31, 2006 diagonal is accident year 2006 at 12 months. In 
the table we observe three claims with 2006 accident dates. However, only Claim IDs 5 and 6 
were reported in 2006. Thus, we do not include Claim ID 7 in the calculation for the 
December 31, 2006 valuation
24. The paid claims for accident year 2006 as of December 31, 2006 
are equal to the sum of claim payments ($260 + $200) for Claim IDs 5 and 6.  
 
Our example continues with the third diagonal, the December 31, 2007 valuation, which is also 
known as the 2007 diagonal. The third diagonal consists of three points: 
 
 Accident year 2005 at 36 months 
 Accident year 2006 at 24 months 
 Accident year 2007 at 12 months 
 
We follow a similar procedure of cumulating claim payments made through December 31, 2007. 
For accident year 2005, there are additional claim payments of $300 made during 2007. Thus, 
cumulative claim payments for accident year 2005 as of December 31, 2007 are $1,520. For 
accident year 2006, we cumulate the claim payments ($460 in 2006 plus $460 in 2007) for a total 
cumulative paid claims of $920. Similar to other accident years in our example, there is one claim 
for accident year 2007 that is not reported by year-end. Thus, the paid claims for accident year 2007 
at 12 months only include Claim IDs 8, 9, and 10. We note that there is no payment for Claim ID 
10 as of December 31, 2007. Thus, the paid claims value entered in the triangle is the sum of claim 
payments for Claim IDs 8 and 9 ($200 + $460).  
 
We leave it to the reader to calculate the final diagonal of the cumulative paid claim triangle.  
 
 
                                                 
24 In some applications, it may be far easier to just include Claim 7 as a zero value than to write 
programming logic to exclude it from the application.   
 
57

=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
Case Outstanding Triangle 
 
In the following table, we summarize the detailed case outstanding from our 15-claim example. 
Table 9 is simply an excerpt from Table 5 presented earlier in this chapter. 
 
Table 9 – Detailed Example – Claims Transaction Ending Case Outstanding Data 
   Ending Case Outstanding 
Claim 
ID 
Accident 
Date 
Report 
Date 
 
2005 
 
2006 
 
2007 
 
2008 
1 Jan-5-05 Feb-1-05 200 0 0 0 
2 May-4-05 May-15-05 300 0 0 0 
3 Aug-20-05 Dec-15-05 400 200 0 0 
4 Oct-28-05 May-15-06  1,000 1,200 1,200 
       
5 Mar-3-06 Jul-1-06  190 0 0 
6 Sep-18-06 Oct-2-06  500 500 270 
7 Dec-1-06 Feb-15-07   420 650 
       
8 Mar-1-07 Apr-1-07   200 0 
9 Jun-15-07 Sep-9-07   390 390 
10 Sep-30-07 Oct-20-07   400 400 
11 Dec-12-07 Mar-10-08    530 
       
12 Apr-12-08 Jun-18-08    200 
13 May-28-08 Jul-23-08    300 
14 Nov-12-08 Dec-5-08    540 
15 Oct-15-08 Feb-2-09     
 
We use the table above to create the case outstanding development triangle below. 
 
Table 10 – Case Outstanding Triangle 
Accident Case Outstanding as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 
2005 900 1,200 1,200 1,200 
2006 690 920 920  
2007 990 1,320   
2008 1,040    
 
The first value in the case outstanding development triangle is accident year 2005 at 12 months. 
We add the ending case outstanding values for Claim IDs 1, 2, and 3 to derive the case 
outstanding value of $900. We do not include Claim ID 4 since it is not reported until May 15, 
2006. Case outstanding for accident year 2005 at 24 months (i.e., valuation date December 31, 
2006) are equal to the case outstanding values for Claim IDs 3 and 4 or $1,200 ($200 + $1,000). 
Case outstanding for Claim IDs 1 and 2 are both $0 at December 31, 2006. For accident year 
2005 at 36 months and 48 months, only Claim ID 4 has an ending case outstanding value. For 
both these valuation dates, December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2008, the ending case 
outstanding is $1,200. 
 
58

=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
For accident year 2006 at 12 months (i.e., valuation date December 31, 2006), the case 
outstanding value of $690 is equal to the sum of the ending case outstanding for Claim IDs 5 and 
6 ($190 + $500). Case outstanding at 24 months (i.e., valuation date December 31, 2007) is equal 
to the sum of case outstanding on all three accident year 2006 claims ($0 + $500 + 420). The final 
value in the triangle for accident year 2006 is at 36 months (i.e., valuation date December 31, 
2008). Claim IDs 6 and 7 have ending case outstanding values of $270 and $650, respectively. 
Thus, total case outstanding for accident year 2006 at 36 months is $920. 
 
You can continue in a similar manner to build the remainder of the case outstanding development 
triangle.  
 
 
Reported Claim Development Triangle 
 
We define reported claims to be equal to cumulative paid claims through the valuation date plus 
case outstanding at the valuation date. Thus, we are able to build the reported claim development 
triangle by adding the cumulative paid claim triangle to the case outstanding triangle. Table 11 
below presents the reported claim triangle for our sample 15 claims.  
 
Table 11 – Reported Claim Development Triangle 
Accident Reported Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 
2005 1,500 2,420 2,720 3,020 
2006 1,150 1,840 2,070  
2007 1,650 2,640   
2008 1,740    
 
It is interesting to return to the original data and observe what happened to accident year 2005 
claims over time. Claim ID 1 occurred early in 2005 and was reported shortly thereafter. Through 
December 31, 2005 (i.e., the first year of development), there were $400 in claim payments and 
the insurer established a case outstanding of $200. In the following year, this claim settled for 
slightly more than the case outstanding value. A claim payment of $220 was made during 2006 
and the case outstanding was reduced to $0. There was no further activity on this claim through 
year-end 2008. 
 
Claim ID 2 occurred in May 2005 and was also reported in May 2005. The insurer made a claim 
payment of $200 in 2005 and established a case outstanding of $300 by year-end 2005. During 
2006, the insurer settled Claim ID 2 for $200, which was less than the $300 case outstanding. 
Thus, on this claim there was a saving from the initial case outstanding estimate. 
 
The final settlement for Claim ID 3, however, was higher than the initial estimate. When the 
insured reported the claim near the end of 2005, the claims adjuster established an initial case 
outstanding of $400. During 2006, the insurer made a payment of $200 and reduced the case 
outstanding to $200. Thus, the reported claim estimate for this particular claim did not change 
during 2006; the payment of $200 offsets a similar reduction of $200 in the case outstanding. 
During 2007, there was a final settlement for Claim ID 3 of $300. The final incurred value for this 
claim was $500, or $100 more than the reported claim estimates at year-ends 2005 and 2006. 
 
59

=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
We continue looking at the activity of accident year 2005 claims during 2008. There was no 
activity on Claim IDs 1 through 3. However the reported claim for Claim ID 4 continues to 
increase. This was a late-reported claim. At December 31, 2006, the case outstanding was $1,000 
for this claim. By December 31, 2007, the case outstanding had increased to $1,200. There were 
no payments in either 2006 or 2007. In 2008, claim payments were $300 but there was no change 
in the ending case outstanding. Thus, the reported claim for this particular claim increased by 
$300 during 2008 from $1,200 (the sum of cumulative claim payments through December 31, 
2007, $0, and ending unpaid case at December 31, 2007, $1,200) to $1,500 (the sum of 
cumulative claim payments through December 31, 2008, $300, and ending unpaid case at 
December 31, 2008, $1,200). 
 
A similar review can take place with the claims experience of each accident year. 
 
 
Reported Claim Count Development Triangle 
 
We also use the data in Table 5 to build a reported claim count triangle. 
 
Table 12 – Reported Claim Count Development Triangle 
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 
2005 3 4 4 4 
2006 2 3 3  
2007 3 4   
2008 3    
 
We describe how to build the claim count development triangle by using accident years 2005 and 
2008 as examples. Based on the data in Table 5, we note that while there are 4 claims for 2005, 
only 3 of the claims were reported as of December 31, 2005. Thus, the first cell in the reported 
claim count triangle which represents accident year 2005 as of December 31, 2005 shows 3 
claims reported. By December 31, 2006, all four claims were reported. No further claims were 
reported for accident year 2005, and thus the number of reported claims remains unchanged at 4 
for ages 36 months and 48 months. 
 
The final row of the reported claim count triangle is for accident year 2008 as of December 31, 
2008. As of 12 months, there were 3 claims reported for accident year 2008. Claim ID 15 was not 
reported until 2009 and thus is not included in the triangle. 
 
 
Other Types of Development Triangles 
 
As mentioned earlier, actuaries use development triangles with a wide variety of data. The first 
step in creating triangles is to determine the time interval for organizing the data. The time 
interval represents the rows of the triangles. In our previous example, we use accident year. Other 
common intervals include: 
 
 Report year 
 Underwriting year 
60

=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
 Treaty year25 
 Policy year 
 Fiscal year 
 
By far, accident year is the most common organization of claims data actuaries in the U.S. and 
Canada use when creating development triangles. Actuaries also often rely on report year 
development triangles for the analysis of claims-made coverages such as U.S. medical malpractice 
and errors and omissions liability. Reinsurers often organize claims data by underwriting year. 
Policy year is a similar concept to underwriting year. 
 
For self-insurers, the policy year, fiscal year, and accident year are often the same. For example, a 
self-insured public entity with a fiscal year April 1 to March 31 may issue documents of coverage 
to covered departments and agencies with an April 1 to March 31 coverage period; such entity may 
also arrange excess insurance with a policy year of April 1 to March 31. Finally, this public entity 
may aggregate development triangles using accident year periods of April 1 to March 31.  
 
Claims can be categorized by time intervals other than annual intervals. Actuaries also use 
monthly, quarterly, and semi-annual data for developing estimates of unpaid claims. When 
selecting the time interval, important considerations for the actuary include the credibility of the 
experience or the stability of development or both. 
 
There are numerous possibilities for the types of claims data that are presented in development 
triangles. Common types of data include: 
 
 Reported claims 
 Case outstanding 
 Cumulative total paid claims 
 Cumulative paid claims on closed claim counts
26 
 Incremental paid claims 
 Reported claim counts 
 Claim counts on closed with payment  
 Claim counts on closed with no payment  
 Total closed claim counts 
 Outstanding claim counts 
 
Actuaries also use the data types listed previously to create triangles of ratios and average claim 
values. Examples of these triangles include: 
 
 Ratio of paid-to-reported claims 
 
 Ratio of total closed claim counts-to-reported claim counts 
 
 Ratio of claim counts on closed with payment-to-total closed claim counts 
 
 Ratio of claim counts on closed without payment-to-total closed claim counts 
 
                                                 
25 Treaty year is defined as a period of twelve months covered by a reinsurance treaty or contract. 
 
26 These values may be problematic to obtain in cases where interim or pre-closing payments are possible.  
61

=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 5 - The Development Triangle 
 
 
 Average case outstanding (case outstanding divided by outstanding claim counts) 
 
 Average paid on closed claims (cumulative paid claims on closed claims divided by claim 
counts closed with payment)27 
 
 Average paid (cumulative total paid claims divided by total closed claim counts) 
 
 Average reported (reported claims divided by reported claim counts) 
 
The triangles of ratios and average values provide useful insight into the relationships that exist 
between the various types of data at different points in time during the experience period. In 
Chapter 6, we explain how actuaries use these types of triangles as diagnostic tools. 
 
For some insurers, the actuary analyzes LAE data independently of claims only. In such 
situations, the actuary may also create development triangles with the ratios of paid LAE-to-paid 
claims only and the ratios of reported LAE-to-reported claims only. 
 
In our discussion so far, we have not mentioned how many development periods the actuary 
needs to evaluate. Is it necessary to analyze development through the 3
rd maturity year, the 5th 
maturity year, the 10th or the 20th maturity year? If possible, the actuary should analyze 
development out to the point at which the development ceases (i.e., until the selected 
development factors are equal to 1.000). The number of development periods required generally 
varies by line, jurisdiction, and also by data type. For example, paid claims typically require a 
greater number of development periods than reported claims, and reported claims often require a 
greater number of development periods than reported claim counts. Also, automobile physical 
damage claims settle much more quickly than general liability claims, and therefore an analysis 
of unpaid claims for automobile physical damage requires fewer development periods than a 
similar analysis for general liability. 
 
In the following chapters, we use the development triangle both as a diagnostic tool and as the 
primary input for numerous estimation techniques for unpaid claims. 
 
 
Naming Convention for Examples 
 
In our examples, we use the terms “reported claims” to refer to cumulative reported claims and 
“paid claims” to refer to cumulative paid claims. Similarly, we use the terms “reported claim 
counts” and “closed claim counts” to refer to cumulative reported and closed claim counts, 
respectively. For some examples in Chapters 11 through 13, we use incremental values of claims 
and claim counts. Any development triangles containing incremental values, of claims or claim 
counts, are specifically labeled as incremental.  
                                                 
27 As noted on the previous page, cumulative paid claims on closed claim counts may be difficult to obtain. 
In such cases, actuaries may determine that interim or pre-closing payments are immaterial enough to 
justify the inexact match from including all payments, even those from open claims, divided by closed 
claim counts. 
62

=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT TRIANGLE AS A 
DIAGNOSTIC TOOL 
 
 
Part 2 of this book is about information gathering. We begin Chapter 3 with a description of the 
types of data and how data is organized. In Chapter 4, we discuss the importance of meeting with 
those involved with the operations and processes underlying the data (labeled in this text as 
management) and understanding the environment in which the insurer operates – both the internal 
and external environments. In Chapter 5, we construct development triangles. We conclude Part 2 
with Chapter 6 in which we combine the knowledge we obtain by analyzing the development 
triangles with the information we receive during meetings with the insurer’s claims and 
underwriting departments. In this chapter, we use the development triangles as a tool to further 
understand how changes in an insurer’s operations and the external environment can influence the 
claims data. This is the final step before we delve into specific techniques for estimating unpaid 
claims.  
 
It is very important for the actuary to communicate with the insurer’s management if the changes 
that management reports to have implemented are not supported by the data. It is quite common 
for an insurer’s management to report significant changes in both the claims settlement area and 
the strength (i.e., adequacy) of its case outstanding. Insurers may try to accomplish such changes 
through new policies, procedures, and/or information systems. Many times actuaries do see 
evidence of operational change in the quantitative data that they are reviewing. However, in some 
situations, the best intentions of senior claims management may not have worked through the 
organization as planned; in these situations a direct effect on the claims data may not be evident 
to the actuary. Sometimes, it is just a matter of time before signs of the operational changes start 
to show in the claims data. Other times, there may be cultural blocks within the organization that 
are resisting the intended changes. Through open discussions with claims management and staff 
as well as a detailed review of the claims data, the actuary should be able to gain a clear 
understanding of the situation and then choose the best technique(s) to match the particular 
situation at hand. 
 
 
Detailed Example – Background Information  
 
In the following example, we demonstrate how to use development triangles for diagnostic 
review. For this purpose, we use the experience of an insurer’s private passenger automobile 
portfolio in one geographic region (e.g., a single state or a province). Specifically, we look at the 
historical claims experience for automobile bodily injury liability over the 2002 to 2008 
experience period. In this chapter and throughout Part 3, we refer to this example as XYZ Insurer. 
 
The purpose of our example is not to raise every possible question or to identify every possible 
issue that may exist for XYZ Insurer. Instead, our goal is to teach you how to look at relationships 
and how to begin to develop your own observations and questions.  
 
In this example, we assume that meetings with various members of the insurer’s operations have 
already taken place. At these meetings, we were told that there were significant changes within 
the claims department over the last several years, including changes at the most senior levels of 
management. The new Senior Vice President – Claims told us that one of her main priorities is to 
carry adequate case outstanding. Management insists that the strength of current case outstanding 
is much greater than in prior years. During our meetings, we also learned that the insurer 
63

=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
implemented new information systems in the past three years for the purpose of speeding up the 
claims reporting and settlement processes. Management at XYZ Insurer believes very strongly in 
the saying “a good claim is a closed claim” and has instituted policies and procedures to expedite 
the claim settlement process.  
 
In addition to the changing environment within the insurer’s operations, we know that there were 
significant changes to the automobile insurance product in this geographic region. Major tort 
reforms were implemented in 2006 resulting in caps on awards as well as pricing restrictions and 
mandated rate level changes for all insurers operating in the region. As a result of these reforms, 
management decided to reduce its presence in this market. 
 
Having met with management, it is now time to begin our diagnostic review of the data. One goal 
of such a review is to determine if we can observe the effect of the changes implemented by 
management in the claims data provided by the insurer. We expect that our review will likely lead 
to further questions and result in more discussions with members of the management team. We 
also hope that based on our diagnostic review, we will be able to determine what types of data 
and which techniques will be most appropriate to estimate unpaid claims for XYZ Insurer under 
its current circumstances. 
 
 
Premium History 
 
In Table 1 below, we summarize earned premium as well as XYZ Insurer’s historical rate 
changes for this line of business. XYZ Insurer provided the earned premium and rate level 
changes by year. We calculate the cumulative average rate level and annual change in exposures 
from year to year.
28 
 
Table 1 – Summary of Earned Premium and Rate Changes 
 
Calendar  
Year 
Earned  
Premiums  
($000) 
 
Rate  
Changes 
Cumulative 
Average 
Rate Level 
Annual 
Exposure 
Change 
2002 61,183  0.0%  
2003 69,175 +5.0% 5.0% 7.7% 
2004 99,322 +7.5% 12.9% 33.6% 
2005 138,151 +15.0% 29.8% 21.0% 
2006 107,578 +10.0% 42.8% -29.2% 
2007 62,438 -20.0% 14.2% -27.5% 
2008 47,797 -20.0% -8.6% -4.3% 
 
(To simplify the analysis in this chapter and in Part 3, assume that the rate changes in the above 
table represent the average earned rate level for the year. For further information about 
                                                 
28 The average rate level is calculated by successive multiplication of the annual rate changes. For example, 
for 2004, the cumulative average rate level is equal to {[(1.00 + 5.0%) x (1.00 + 7.5%)] – 1.00}, or 12.9%. 
Similarly, the average rate level change for 2007 is equal to {[(1.00 + 42.8%) x (1.00 – 20.0%)] – 1.00}, or 
14.2%. The annual exposure change is equal to the annual change in earned premiums divided by the rate 
change in the year. For example, the annual exposure change for 2003 is equal to {[(69,175 / 61,183) / (1 + 
5.0%)] – 1.00}, or 7.7%. For 2008, the annual exposure change is equal to {[(47,797 / 62,438) / (1 – 
20.0%)] – 1.00}, or -4.3%. 
 
64

=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
adjustments for rate level changes, we refer the reader to C. L. McClenahan, “Ratemaking,” 
Chapter 3 in Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, Fourth Edition, CAS, 2001.) 
 
 
The Reported and Paid Claim Triangles 
 
Reported and paid claim development data are the two most common types of data actuaries have 
access to. Tables 2 and 3 below present the reported and paid claim development triangles, 
respectively, for XYZ Insurer.  
 
Table 2 – Reported Claim Development Triangle 
Accident Reported Claims ($000) as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 12,811 20,370 26,656 37,667 44,414 48,701 48,169 
2003 9,651 16,995 30,354 40,594 44,231 44,373  
2004 16,995 40,180 58,866 71,707 70,288   
2005 28,674 47,432 70,340 70,655    
2006 27,066 46,783 48,804     
2007 19,477 31,732      
2008 18,632       
 
Table 3 – Paid Claim Development Triangle 
Accident Paid Claims ($000) as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 2,318 7,932 13,822 22,095 31,945 40,629 44,437 
2003 1,743 6,240 12,683 22,892 34,505 39,320  
2004 2,221 9,898 25,950 43,439 52,811   
2005 3,043 12,219 27,073 40,026    
2006 3,531 11,778 22,819     
2007 3,529 11,865      
2008 3,409       
 
When conducting a diagnostic review with claim development triangles, the actuary is generally 
looking down the columns of the triangle. The actuary is looking at the experience of different 
accident years at the same age of development (i.e., same maturity age). In a stable environment, 
the actuary expects to see stability in the claim experience down each column.  
 
We combine the premium data with the claim data and calculate two more diagnostic triangles: 
the ratio of reported claims to earned premium (also known as the reported claim ratio) and the 
ratio of reported claims to on-level earned premium. We calculate the on-level premium using the 
average rate level changes by year and restating the earned premium for each year as if it was 
written at the 2008 rate level. 
65

=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
 
Table 4 – Ratio of Reported Claims to Earned Premium 
Accident Ratio of Reported Claims to Earned Premium as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002  0.209   0.333   0.436   0.616   0.726   0.796   0.787  
2003  0.140   0.246   0.439   0.587   0.639   0.641   
2004  0.171   0.405   0.593   0.722   0.708    
2005  0.208   0.343   0.509   0.511     
2006  0.252   0.435   0.454      
2007  0.312   0.508       
2008  0.390        
 
 
Table 5 – Ratio of Reported Claims to On-Level Earned Premium 
Accident Ratio of Reported Claims to On-Level Earned Premium as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002  0.229   0.364   0.477   0.674   0.794   0.871   0.862  
2003  0.160   0.282   0.504   0.674   0.735   0.737   
2004  0.211   0.500   0.732   0.892   0.874    
2005  0.295   0.488   0.723   0.726     
2006  0.393   0.679   0.709      
2007  0.390   0.635       
2008  0.390        
 
A thorough review of the above triangles, leads us to the following questions/observations: 
 
 What happened in accident year 2003? Why are the reported claims so low after 12 and 24 
months of development? When comparing the changes in claims by year to the changes in 
premiums by year, we need to first consider the rate level history for the insurer. According to 
Table 1, we know that the insurer had a 5% higher rate level in 2003 than 2002. Thus, it 
appears that the insurer experienced an exposure growth of approximately 8% in 2003 
([(($69,175 / 1.05) / $61,183) – 1.00]). Knowing that the insurer actually increased its exposure 
base, it is surprising to see a 25% drop in reported claims for 2003 after 12 months of 
development.  For the 36-, 48-, and 60-month valuations, reported claims for accident year 
2003 appear to return to levels similar to those experienced in 2002. What led to the lower level 
of reported claims for the first 24 months? Was there a change in systems? Were paid claims or 
case outstanding driving the decrease in reported claims? If we look at the paid claim triangle 
for accident year 2003, we observe that paid claims are also down at 12 and 24 months of 
development and that the reduction is roughly of the same magnitude as for the reported claims.   
 
 What happened in accident year 2004, particularly at and after the 24-month valuation? While we 
observe that earned premiums are up 44% over 2002 and 34% over 2003 (after adjustment for 
rate changes), the reported claims for 2004 after 24 months of development are up by 97% 
[($40,180 / $20,370) – 1.00] over 2002 and 136% [($40,180 / $16,995) – 1.00] over 2003. Are 
large claims or more claim counts or both driving the increase? Was there a change in case 
outstanding adequacy that had an effect on the December 31, 2005 valuation? (Remember that 
the 24-month valuation for accident year 2004 corresponds to the December 31, 2005 valuation.) 
 
66

=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
 What happened in accident years 2005 and 2006 to drive reported claims up so much at 12 
months of development? A quick look at the higher volume of earned premiums for these two 
years provides some of the explanation for the increase. However, we observe that, at the 12-
month valuation, reported claims are again increasing at a rate that is greater than the increase 
in exposures and our knowledge of the inflationary environment. For example, we compare 
reported claims between accident years 2004 and 2005:  
 
 [(AY
2005 / AY2004) – 1.00] = [($28,674 / $16,995) – 1.00] = 69%  
 
The 69% increase observed in reported claims between 2004 and 2005 is greater than the 
increase in exposures between these years, which is 21%. Similarly, we compare reported 
claims between accident years 2004 and 2006: 
 
[(AY
2006 / AY2004) – 1.00] = [($27,066 / $16,995) – 1.00] = 59%  
 
The 59% increase observed in reported claims between 2004 and 2006 is greater than the 
change in exposures between these years, which is actually a decrease of 14%. 
 
 If we look down the 24-month column, we observe unusually large volumes of reported 
claims for accident years 2004 through 2006. For each of these years, reported claims are 
greater than $40 million, and the on-level reported claim ratios are greater than 0.40. For 
these same three accident years, we see that XYZ experienced larger volumes of paid claims 
with values of approximately $10 million for 2004 and $12 million for 2005 and 2006. We 
also note that, at 24 months, accident year 2007 reported claims are lower than the preceding 
three accident years. Could the lower claims in 2007 be a result of the tort reforms introduced 
during 2006? 
 
 When we analyze the experience for accident year 2006, we should keep in mind that the 
insurer experienced a significant reduction in exposures during the year. Earned premiums 
dropped from $138,151 in 2005 to $107,578 even with a 10% rate increase. This indicates a 
drop in exposures of almost 30%. However reported claims after 12 months of development 
differ from 2005 by less than 6% [($27,066 / $28,674) – 1.00] and at 24 months of 
development by less than 2% [($46,783 / $47,432) – 1.00]. After 36 months, we do see a 
significant difference between claims for accident years 2005 and 2006. 
 
 Now turning our attention to accident years 2007 and 2008, we see that reported claims are 
significantly lower than for 2005 and 2006 though the claim ratios are not. We can determine 
the change in exposures based on the given premium information. While there was another 
reduction of approximately 30% in the exposures during 2007 (from 2006), the change in 
earned premiums between 2007 and 2008 was primarily due to the rate change and not due to 
changes in exposure volume. The volume of reported claims at 12 months for accident years 
2007 and 2008 is consistent with the earned premium information. 
 
At this point it is valuable for the actuary to analyze additional development triangles to look for 
answers to some of the questions raised in this initial review of the claims data. 
 
 
67

=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
The Ratio of Paid-to-Reported Claims 
 
There are many situations under which reported and paid claim development triangles are the 
only triangles available to the actuary. Using these two triangles the actuary can calculate a ratio 
of the paid claims-to-reported claims (also known as the paid-to-reported ratio). Building a 
triangle using such ratios allows the actuary to analyze the evolution of this relationship over the 
experience period.  
 
As a diagnostic tool, this ratio examines the consistency of paid claims relative to reported 
claims. It is an important tool for testing whether there might have been changes in case 
outstanding adequacy or in settlement patterns. Since we are analyzing a ratio, we need to 
investigate further any changes observed to determine if the change is occurring in paid claims 
(i.e., the numerator) or in the case outstanding, which are a critical component of the reported 
claims (i.e., the denominator). However, if we do not observe changes in the ratio of paid-to-
reported claims, it does not necessarily mean that changes are not occurring. There could be 
offsetting changes in both claim settlement practices and the adequacy of case outstanding that 
result in no change to the ratio of paid-to-reported claims.  
 
In our example, claims department management believes that the new claims settlement practices 
resulted in a speed-up in claims closure. Based on this information, we would expect paid claims 
to be increasing along the latest diagonals relative to prior years. Management also reported that 
the new policies related to case outstanding are resulting in stronger unpaid case than in prior 
years. Therefore, reported claims should also be increasing along the latest diagonals of the 
triangle. With both paid claims and reported claims increasing, the ratio of paid-to-reported 
claims may be unchanged along the latest diagonals when compared with prior years’ diagonals. 
 
Now, we look at the triangle summarizing the historical ratios of paid-to-reported claims for XYZ 
Insurer. 
 
Table 6 – Ratio of Paid Claims-to-Reported Claims 
Accident Ratio of Paid Claims-to-Reported Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 0.181 0.389 0.519 0.587 0.719 0.834 0.923 
2003 0.181 0.367 0.418 0.564 0.780 0.886  
2004 0.131 0.246 0.441 0.606 0.751   
2005 0.106 0.258 0.385 0.567    
2006 0.130 0.252 0.468     
2007 0.181 0.374      
2008 0.183       
 
We continue to look down each column and to compare the experience from accident year to 
accident year. Based on the experience in Table 6, it is difficult to discern changes in this ratio. 
While the ratio was decreasing at 12 months for accident years 2004 through 2006, it has returned 
to historical levels for accident years 2007 and 2008. Similar observations can be made at 24 
months. 
  
We recall that since we are reviewing a ratio, we need to look at the potential for changes in both 
the numerator and the denominator. A downward trend in the ratio of paid-to-reported claims 
could be the result of decreasing paid claims or of increasing case outstanding adequacy. We 
understand from our discussions with management of the claims department that the rate of 
68

=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
claims settlement has increased. Is the change in case outstanding adequacy masking the changes 
in the settlement process? We also ask if the type of claims reported is changing. Different types 
of claims have different settlement and reporting characteristics. This could have an effect on 
both paid and reported claims. 
 
 
The Ratio of Paid Claims to On-Level Earned Premium 
 
Next, we decide to review the ratio of cumulative paid claims to on-level earned premium. We 
hope that a review of this diagnostic triangle will provide insight as to whether there was a speed-
up in claims payment or possibly deterioration in underwriting results. 
 
Table 7 – Ratio of Cumulative Paid Claims to On-Level Earned Premium 
Accident Ratio of Cumulative Paid Claims to On-Level Earned Premium as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002  0.041   0.142   0.247   0.395   0.571   0.727   0.795  
2003  0.029   0.104   0.211   0.380   0.573   0.653   
2004  0.028   0.123   0.323   0.540   0.657    
2005  0.031   0.126   0.278   0.412     
2006  0.051   0.171   0.331      
2007  0.071   0.238       
2008  0.071        
 
There does appear to be evidence of a possible speed-up in payments, particularly at 12 and 24 
months. The question still remains as to whether or not there has been a shift in the type of claim 
settled at each age. At this point, we request additional data (reported and closed claim counts) 
and create new development diagnostic triangles for further review. 
 
 
Claim Count Triangles 
 
Just as we review the reported and paid claim triangles above, we also review the triangles of 
reported and closed claim counts. 
 
Table 8 – Reported Claim Count Development Triangle 
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 1,342 1,514 1,548 1,557 1,549 1,552 1,554 
2003 1,373 1,616 1,630 1,626 1,629 1,629  
2004 1,932 2,168 2,234 2,249 2,258   
2005 2,067 2,293 2,367 2,390    
2006 1,473 1,645 1,657     
2007 1,192 1,264      
2008 1,036       
 
69

=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
 
Table 9 – Closed Claim Count Development Triangle 
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 203 607 841 1,089 1,327 1,464 1,523 
2003 181 614 941 1,263 1,507 1,568  
2004 235 848 1,442 1,852 2,029   
2005 295 1,119 1,664 1,946    
2006 307 906 1,201     
2007 329 791      
2008 276       
 
Before commencing the analysis of the claim count development triangles, it is important that the 
actuary understand the types of data contained within such triangles. How does the insurer treat 
reopened claims? Are they coded as a new claim or is a previously closed claim re-opened? If the 
insurer treats reopened claims in the latter, there could potentially be a decrease across a row in 
the closed claim count development triangle. Does the insurer include claims closed with no 
payment (CNP) in the reported and closed claim count triangles? How are claims classified that 
have only expense payments and no claim payment? 
 
XYZ Insurer indicated that the closed claim count development data excludes CNP claim counts. 
The reported claim count development data is based on the sum of closed claim counts (excluding 
CNP) and claims with case outstanding values; thus, the reported claim count development 
triangle also excludes CNP counts.  
 
Our review of these triangles leads to the following observations and questions: 
 
 At 12 months, we see that the reported claim counts experienced an increase of 40% [(1,932 / 
1,373) – 1.00] and closed claim counts had an increase of 30% [(235 / 181) – 1.00] between 
accident years 2003 and 2004. Over this same time period, we observe a 76% increase in 
reported claims. Similarly, the increases in claim counts at 24 months for accident year 2005 
[(2,293 / 2,168) – 1.00 = 5.8%] are not as significant as the increases in reported claims 
[($47,432 / $40,180) – 1.00 = 18.0%]. Why are claims increasing so much more than the 
number of claims? Could large claims be driving the increases?  
 
 Reported claim counts for accident years 2004 and 2005 stand out as the highest values at all 
ages. This is generally consistent with the experience shown in the reported claim triangle. 
However, we do not observe a similar increase in the closed claim count triangle where 2006 
and 2007 are highest at 12 months. At 24 months, the highest closed claim count values are 
for accident years 2005 and 2006. Are the higher closed claim counts due to the new systems 
implemented at the insurer?  
 
 The decrease in reported claim counts for 2006 and 2007 is consistent with the decrease in 
exposures for these years. We do not see a similar decrease in closed claim counts, however. 
Perhaps, this is due to the speed-up in claims settlement processes that management discussed 
in our meetings. It is worth investigating this issue further. 
 
70

=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
 For accident year 2008, reported and closed claim counts are lower than we would expect given 
reported claims, paid claims, and the relative steady-state of exposures between 2007 and 2008. 
This leads us to further investigation of why the number of claims is down for the latest year. 
 
 
Ratio of Closed-to-Reported Claim Counts 
 
If the actuary suspects that there are changes in the settlement rate of claims, either based on 
information gained from meetings with management or changes observed in the ratio of paid-to-
reported claims, the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts is an important diagnostic tool to 
review. Many factors can have an effect on the reporting and closing of claims. For example, a 
large catastrophic storm, such as a hurricane, has the potential to temporarily limit an insurer’s 
operations with telephone and computer system shutdowns. In such a situation, there may be a 
one-time blip with a decrease in the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts. Other forces that 
could result in a change in the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts include: 
 
 Change in the guidelines for the establishment of a claim 
 
 Decrease in the statute of limitations, which often accompanies major tort reform  
 
 Delegation of a higher limit for settlement of claims to a TPA 
 
 Restructuring of the claim field offices, such as through the merging of existing offices or the 
addition of new offices 
 
 Introduction of a new call center to handle claims (This could affect both reported and closed 
claim counts and thus the actuary would need to further investigate whether changes were 
affecting the numerator, closed claim counts, the denominator, reported claim counts, or 
both.
29) 
 
Management at XYZ Insurer told us that they implemented a new claims processing system and 
that claims are now settling much more quickly than in the past. Management indicated that the 
new system is having an effect on the entire portfolio of outstanding claims not just claims from 
the latest accident year. With respect to the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts, we would 
then expect to see greater ratios for the latest diagonals than for prior years.  
 
                                                 
29 Changes in claims handling procedures can result in decreases and increases in the rate of claim 
payments. Sometimes, a change in procedures results in a temporary increase in closing patterns, such as 
when a claim department makes an extra effort to get the backlog as low as possible before making a 
transition to a new system. Sometimes, the speed-up is due to faster processing under the new system. 
Sometimes the new system leads to a slowdown in closing, due to a learning curve necessary before the 
new system is fully operational.  
71

=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
We generate the following triangle based on the claims information presented earlier for XYZ Insurer. 
 
Table 10 – Ratio of Closed-to-Reported Claim Counts 
Accident Ratio of Closed-to-Reported Claim Counts as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 0.151 0.401 0.543 0.699 0.857 0.943 0.980 
2003 0.132 0.380 0.577 0.777 0.925 0.963  
2004 0.122 0.391 0.645 0.823 0.899   
2005 0.143 0.488 0.703 0.814    
2006 0.208 0.551 0.725     
2007 0.276 0.626      
2008 0.266       
 
Change is clearly evident in this diagnostic triangle. For the first four years in the experience period 
(2002 through 2005) at 12 months of development, the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts was 
roughly 0.14. For each of the last three years (at 12 months), the ratio is in excess of 0.20; and for 
the latest year it is 0.266. We observe the same type of increases for the 24-month through 48-
month development periods. At 24 months, the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts for the 
latest accident year, 2007, is 0.626 and for the earliest year, 2002, is 0.401; at 36 months, the ratio 
for the latest accident year, 2006, is 0.725 and for the earliest year, 2002, is 0.543. 
 
The experience of closed and reported claim counts is consistent with management’s report of 
greater emphasis on settling claims faster.  After concluding that management’s efforts have 
indeed had an effect on the claims settlement patterns, the actuary must then consider the 
consequences of such a change. Generally, insurers are able to close the less complicated and less 
expensive claims the quickest. The closure of more complicated claims, which tend to involve 
litigation and expert witnesses, are often less in the control of the insurer since third parties play a 
significant role in the claims settlement process. If the insurer’s greater focus on closing claims is 
having its greatest influence on the settlement of smaller claims, there will likely be a shift in the 
type of claims closed or open at any particular age in the claim development triangle. We discuss 
this further in the next section on average claims. 
 
 
Average Claims 
 
We use the reported and paid claim development triangles as well as the reported and closed 
claim count triangles to calculate various average values. For XYZ Insurer, we calculate the 
following: 
 
Table 11 – Definitions of Average Values 
Average Value Definition 
Average reported claim Reported claim tr iangle / reported claim count triangle 
  
Average paid claim Paid claim triangle / closed claim count triangle 
  
Average case outstanding Reported claim triangle – paid claim triangle 
 Reported claim count triangle – closed claim count triangle 
 
72

=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
Before summarizing the observations from XYZ Insurer, we highlight two important issues 
related to average values. First, it is important for the actuary to have a clear understanding of the 
definition of closed and reported claim counts. Some insurers include claims with no payment 
(CNP) in the definition of closed claim counts and other insurers exclude CNP. Similarly, some 
insurers include claims with no case outstanding and no payments in the definition of reported 
claim counts, and other insurers define reported claim counts as only those claims with a case 
outstanding greater than $1 or with a claim payment. The result of including CNPs in closed 
claim count statistics or claims with no case outstanding or payments in reported claim counts is a 
much lower average value. For the actuary, what is most important is that he or she knows what 
definition the insurer uses and that the insurer is consistently using the same definition throughout 
the experience period. A change in the definition of claim counts can have a significant 
consequence on the results of diagnostic analyses using claim counts and on estimation 
techniques that rely on the number of claims. It is also important that the actuary is aware of 
differences between the insurer’s definition of claim counts and any external benchmarks that 
would be used for comparison purposes.  
 
Second, large claims, both the presence and absence of such claims, can have a distorting effect 
on average claims. Actuaries may remove unusually large claims from the database before 
conducting both ratio and average value calculations and handle the unpaid claim estimate 
required for such large claims separately. Another alternative is to prepare development triangles 
using limited claims. For example, claims can be limited to $500,000 or $1 million per 
occurrence in the reported and paid claim development triangles. The determination of the claim 
limit is a matter of significant actuarial judgment and is beyond the scope of this book. (See 
previous discussion of determining a large claims threshold in Chapter 3.) 
 
Policy deductibles can also cause a distorting effect on the analysis of average values. Again, the 
actuary must understand what is included and excluded from the data source, in terms of claims, 
recoverables, and claim counts. Retentions can also distort severities. 
 
For XYZ Insurer, closed claim counts exclude claims closed without any payment; similarly, 
reported claim counts exclude claims in which there are no case outstanding and no payments. 
Paid claims, for XYZ Insurer, include partial payments as well as payments on closed claims. 
Thus, our average paid claim triangle will be a combination of payments on settled claims as well 
as payments on claims that are still open.   
 
We present the average reported claim triangle for XYZ Insurer in the following table. The 
average reported claim triangle is frequently used to detect possible changes in case outstanding 
adequacy. It is not quite as valuable as the average case outstanding triangle since reported claims 
include both paid claims and unpaid case. As we discussed previously, changes in paid claims 
have the potential to mask changes in case outstanding adequacy. However, for some insurers, 
open claim counts are not available in triangular format and the average reported claim triangle 
may be all that the actuary has available for diagnostic purposes. 
73

=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
 
Table 12 – Average Reported Claim Development Triangle 
Accident Average Reported Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 9,546 13,455 17,219 24,192 28,673 31,379 30,997 
2003 7,029 10,517 18,622 24,966 27,152 27,239  
2004 8,796 18,533 26,350 31,884 31,129   
2005 13,872 20,686 29,717 29,563    
2006 18,375 28,440 29,453     
2007 16,340 25,104      
2008 17,985       
 
When reviewing triangles of average values for a stable insurer, we expect to see changes down 
the columns limited to inflationary forces only. As we look down the columns of the average 
reported claim triangle in our example above we observe changes that are greater than the annual 
inflation (assumed to be 5% for this region’s automobile bodily injury liability).
30 We do not 
know, however, if the increases are due to greater levels of payments or stronger case 
outstanding. 
 
In Table 13, we show the average paid claim triangle. We remind you that there is a mismatch in 
the average paid claim triangle since the numerator (cumulative paid claims) includes partial 
claim payments and the denominator (closed claim counts) represents only claims with final 
settlement. We must consider this limitation when drawing any conclusions from this particular 
diagnostic triangle. 
 
Table 13 – Average Paid Claim Development Triangle 
Accident Average Paid Claims as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 11,417 13,067 16,436 20,290 24,073 27,752 29,178 
2003 9,631 10,163 13,478 18,125 22,896 25,077  
2004 9,452 11,673 17,996 23,455 26,028   
2005 10,315 10,920 16,270 20,569    
2006 11,502 13,000 19,000     
2007 10,726 15,000      
2008 12,351       
 
In this diagnostic triangle, we observe that the average values along the latest diagonal are 
generally the highest value in each column (particularly at 12 to 36 months). Based on the 
knowledge acquired from our meetings with claims department representatives and our review of 
other diagnostics, we ask whether or not there has been a change in the type of claim that is being 
closed at these particular ages. This is an important question for the actuary to discuss with 
management of the claims department as it could affect the actuary’s selection of estimation 
techniques and claim projection factors.  
 
                                                 
30 It is important to recognize that there are many factors that have an effect on severity trends for any 
particular line of business. Examples include changes in: policy limits purchased, geographic mix, type of 
policyholders insured, definition of claim counts, etc. 
74

=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
The average paid claim triangle appears relatively stable for ages 48 and older. The evidence of 
change in average paid claims only at 12, 24, and 36 months is consistent with our earlier 
comment that insurers typically have the greatest control on closure rates of the less complicated 
and less expensive claims. Closing more complex claims is usually dependent on the actions of 
third parties that are not within the insurer’s control. 
 
Finally, we review the average case outstanding (or average open claim amount) triangle. The 
average case outstanding triangle is one of the most important diagnostic tools for testing changes 
in case outstanding adequacy. In this triangle, a decreasing pattern down the column is an 
indicator of potential weakening in the case outstanding, and an increasing pattern down the 
column is an indicator of possible strengthening in the case outstanding. 
 
Table 14 – Average Case Outstanding Development Triangle 
Accident Average Case Outstanding as of (months) 
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 
2002 9,213 13,714 18,151 33,273 56,167 91,729 120,366 
2003 6,634 10,733 25,647 48,766 79,718 82,826  
2004 8,706 22,941 41,561 71,204 76,320   
2005 14,464 29,994 61,547 68,983    
2006 20,185 47,368 56,984     
2007 18,480 42,002      
2008 20,031       
 
Before drawing any conclusions, however, it is important that the actuary understands the 
dynamics of the insurer. Has there been a change in case outstanding practices, policies, 
philosophy, staff, or senior management of the claims department? Any of these changes could 
affect case outstanding adequacy. The average case outstanding could also be changing due to 
changes in the mix of business in the portfolio that have nothing to do with changes in case 
outstanding strength.  
 
This is why it is so important that the actuary looks at more than one diagnostic tool before 
drawing conclusions and that the actuary returns to the insurer’s claims department for further 
input regarding his or her observations.  
 
To analyze the data in the average case outstanding triangle for XYZ Insurer, we look down the 
columns and compare the average case outstanding at the same age by accident year. For an 
insurer that is operating in a stable environment, we expect that the average case outstanding 
would be increasing down the column at the relevant annual inflation rate.
31 A quick look at the 
average case outstanding in our example tells us that the average case outstanding is generally 
increasing by more than the 5% inflation in this example.  
 
For the earliest years in our experience period (2002 through 2004), the average case outstanding 
at 12 months of development was less than $10,000. For two of the latest three accident years at 
12 months, the average case outstanding is greater than $20,000. We see similar increases at 24 
and 36 months. At 24 months, the average case outstanding for accident years 2002 and 2003 was 
less than $15,000; for accident years 2006 and 2007 at the same development age, the average 
case outstanding values are both greater than $40,000. At 36 months, the average case 
                                                 
31 Note that the relevant annual inflation rate may be something other than the overall inflation rate, as it 
may reflect a different mix of components than found in the overall economy’s inflation. 
75

=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
outstanding for accident years 2002 and 2003 was less than $26,000; for accident years 2005 and 
2006 at the same age, the average value is close to $60,000. We also observe increasing values of 
average case outstanding at 48 and 60 months. 
 
We understand from our meetings with XYZ Insurer management that increased case outstanding 
strength is a priority. We also know that a review of the average case outstanding shows 
increasing average values for outstanding claims. However, before accepting that there has been a 
change in the adequacy of case outstanding, we must ask what effect, if any, is the change in 
claims settlement having on the average case outstanding. If smaller claims are settling more 
quickly, we are then left with only the more complex and more expensive claims. This, in and of 
itself, would lead to an increase down the columns in the average case outstanding. It is very 
important for the actuary to determine how much of the increase in the average case outstanding 
is truly due to a systemic change in the overall level of case outstanding adequacy and how much 
is due to a different mix of claims.  
 
 
Summary Comments for XYZ Insurer 
 
Clearly XYZ Insurer has experienced change over the recent several years. Management 
communicated these changes in our last meeting and every claim development diagnostic that we 
review shows that the changes noted by management are evident. It is now up to the actuary to 
determine how to incorporate all this information in the development of an unpaid claim estimate 
to be carried on XYZ Insurer’s financial statements. The changing environment will have an 
effect on the actuary’s choice of estimation techniques, types of data, and actuarial factors within 
the techniques. We continue to use this example in Part 3 as we introduce basic techniques for 
estimating unpaid claims. 
 
 
Conclusions 
 
In this chapter we present, as an example, an insurer who has the capability of producing 
development triangles for many types of data, including claims and claim counts. Many insurers 
do not have this ability. In these situations, actuaries may be limited to development triangles of 
reported and paid claims only. Actuaries are then faced with the challenge of finding other 
sources of data and information to ensure that they have sufficient knowledge of the insurer in 
order to determine the unpaid claims.  
 
In “Loss Reserving,” Mr. Wiser states: “Exploring the data begins by understanding the trends 
and changes affecting the database. Understanding the data is a prerequisite to estimating sound 
loss reserves. This exploration will help the analyst select appropriate loss reserving methods and 
interpret the results of the methods.”
32   
 
The goal of this chapter is to demonstrate that the development triangle is an excellent tool for 
exploring the data. We discuss how important it is for the actuary to take the information obtained 
during meetings with management and then seek confirmation in the actual claims experience. 
The actuary should not simply accept reports of change or reports of no change without 
confirmation. Without some form of verification, management’s assertion of changes in the 
strength of case outstanding or changes in the rate of claims settlement could lead to inaccurate 
estimates of unpaid claims by the actuary.  
                                                 
32 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001. 
76

=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 6 - The Development Triangle as a Diagnostic Tool 
 
 
The actuary must be able to question management when they see changes in the data that are not 
consistent with what management says has occurred, is occurring, or will be occurring. The 
dialogue between the actuary and those involved with the insurer’s operations (especially claims 
operations) must be ongoing. Understanding the data is a complex process that requires the input 
of many people and ultimately requires the judgment of the actuary to interpret the findings from 
both quantitative and qualitative information.  
77

=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
PART 3 – BASIC TECHNIQUES FOR ESTIMATING 
UNPAID CLAIMS 
 
 
Introduction to Part 3 – Basic Techniques for Estimating Unpaid Claims ............................  79 
 
Chapter 7 – Development Technique ....................................................................................  84 
 
Chapter 8 – Expected Claims Technique ..............................................................................  131 
 
Chapter 9 – Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique ......................................................................  152 
 
Chapter 10 – Cape Cod Technique ........................................................................................  174 
 
Chapter 11 – Frequency-Severity Techniques .......................................................................  194  
 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique .....................................................  265  
 
Chapter 13 – Berquist-Sherman Techniques .........................................................................  283 
 
Chapter 14 – Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance ..................................  329 
 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques ................................................................................  345 
78

=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO PART 3 – BASIC TECHNIQUES FOR 
ESTIMATING UNPAID CLAIMS 
 
 
The Components of Ultimate Claims 
 
In Part 3, we present numerous methods for projecting ultimate claims. Ultimate claims are the 
sum of three components: cumulative paid claims, case outstanding, and IBNR. The relationships 
among these three components vary tremendously by line of insurance, by jurisdiction, and by 
time interval being reviewed (e.g., recent accident years versus mature accident years). The 
relationships also vary from insurer to insurer depending on the insurers’ claims management 
philosophies and procedures.  
 
Paid claims and case outstanding typically represent a high proportion of ultimate claims at early 
maturities for lines of insurance such as automobile physical damage and property. These lines of 
insurance are characterized as short-tail lines of insurance due to the short period of time 
associated with the claims reporting and settlement processes. In contrast, medical malpractice 
occurrence is an example of a line of insurance that is classified in the U.S. as a long-tail line of 
insurance due to the lengthy period of time associated with the reporting and settlement of these 
types of claims. U.S. workers compensation and general liability, including products liability and 
errors and omissions, are other examples of long-tail lines of insurance in the U.S. 
 
In the four pie charts on the following page, we compare the split between paid claims, case 
outstanding, and IBNR for accident years 2006 and 2007 as of December 31, 2007,
33 for the 
consolidated U.S. industry data for automobile physical damage and for medical malpractice 
occurrence.34 While the examples refer to specific U.S. coverages, the intent of the pie charts is to 
demonstrate the significant differences in the proportions between paid, case outstanding, and 
IBNR for different accident years, and the differences between short-tail lines and long-tail lines 
of coverage.   
 
 
 
                                                 
33 The source of data for the four pie charts in this section is the consolidated U.S. annual statement for the 
year ending December 31, 2007, Schedule P (a claim development schedule of the U.S. annual statement) 
contained in Best’s Aggregates & Averages. The data in the pie charts includes claims and DCC net of 
reinsurance, gross of salvage and subrogation.  
 
34 Medical malpractice is the name of the coverage used in Best’s Aggregates & Averages. This coverage is 
also known as medical professional liability. In the U.S., there is separate financial reporting for medical 
malpractice occurrence and medical malpractice claims-made coverages. 
79

=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Throughout Part 3, we use numerous methods to project ultimate claims. We then derive 
estimated IBNR as the difference between projected ultimate claims and reported claims as of the 
valuation date. The total unpaid claim estimate is calculated as the sum of the estimated IBNR 
and case outstanding; alternatively, we can calculate the estimated total unpaid claims as the 
difference between projected ultimate claims and cumulative paid claims as of the valuation date. 
 
 
U.S. Industry
Auto Physical Damage - Net Claims & DCC
AY 2006 at December 31, 2007
Paid Claims 100% 
($40.4 billions) Case Outstanding 
0% ($28.1 millions)
Estimated IBNR 
0% ($7.8 millions)
Paid Claims Case Outstanding Estimated IBNR
U.S. Industry
Auto Physical Damage - Net Claims & DCC
AY 2007 at December 31, 2007
Paid Claims 91%
($39.3 billions)
Estimated IBNR 
2% ($0.9 billions)
Case Outstanding 
6% ($2.8 billions)
Paid Claims Case Outstanding Estimated IBNR
U.S. Industry
M edical M alpractice (Occurrence) - Net Claims & DCC
AY 2006 at December 31, 2007
Paid Claims 4%
($80.0 millions)
Estimated IBNR 
74% ($1.6 billions)
Case Outstanding  
23% ($0.5 billions)
Paid Claims Case Outstanding Estimated IBNR
U.S Industry
M edical M alpractice (Occurrence) - Net Claims & DCC
AY 2007 at December 31, 2007
Paid  Claims 1%
($10.6 millions)
Estimated IBNR 
93% ($1.9 billions)
Case Ou tstand ing  6% 
($0.1 billions)
Paid Claims Case Outstanding Estimated IBNR
80

=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
Actuarial Judgment 
 
In the Berquist and Sherman paper “Loss Reserve Adequacy Testing: A Comprehensive, 
Systematic Approach,”35 there is a discussion of the vital role of actuarial judgment in the 
analysis of unpaid claims. Berquist and Sherman begin their paper with the following: 
 
While specific guidelines for reserve adequacy testing may be established and 
specific examples of an actuarial approach to the testing of loss reserves may be 
offered for particular situations, loss reserving cannot be reduced to a purely 
mechanical process or to a “cookbook” of rules and methods. The utilization and 
interpretation of insurance statistics requires an intimate knowledge of the 
insurance business as well as the actuary’s ability to quantify complex 
phenomena which are not readily measurable. As in the case of ratemaking, 
while certain general methods are widely accepted, actuarial judgment is required 
at many critical junctures to assure that reserve projections are neither distorted 
nor biased. 
 
Berquist and Sherman identify the following specific areas where actuarial judgment is required: 
 
 Determining the optimal combination of the kinds of claims data to be used in the estimation 
of unpaid claims 
 
 Assessing the effect of changes in an insurer’s operations on the claims data that is used in 
estimating unpaid claims 
 
 Adjusting the claims data for the influences of known and quantifiable events 
 
 Evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of various estimation techniques 
 
 Making the final selection of the unpaid claim estimate 
 
Part 3 – Basic Techniques for Estimating Unpaid Claims addresses all of these areas. Through the 
use of numerous examples, which span multiple chapters, we examine different combinations of 
data and use them with a wide range of actuarial projection methods. We study the influence of 
changes in case outstanding adequacy, settlement patterns, underlying claims experience, and 
product mix on the various projection methods. When an insurer has experienced significant 
changes in operations, we seek alternative methods through data reorganization, selection of 
alternative data types, and quantitative manipulation of existing data. In the final chapter of Part 
3, we bring the results of all the various projection methodologies together for evaluation and 
final selection of ultimate claims and unpaid claim estimate.  
 
                                                 
35 PCAS, 1977. 
81

=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
The following table summarizes the examples that we use in Part 3 and the chapters in which they 
can be found. For ease of reference throughout Part 3, we identify each example by an 
abbreviated name.  
 
Example 
Number 
 
Example Name 
 
Description 
 
Chapters 
1 U.S. Industry Auto U.S. private passenger automobile insurance as 
reported in Best’s Aggregates & Averages 
7, 8, 9, 10, 12 
2 XYZ Insurer Private passenger au tomobile bodily injury liability 
portfolio for an insurer who has experienced numerous 
internal changes in operations, management, and 
claims philosophy as well as external influences from 
regulatory reform in the insurance product 
7, 8, 9, 10, 
 11, 12, 13, 15 
3 U.S. PP Auto 
Steady-State 
U.S. private passenger automobile insurance in a 
steady-state environment where claim ratios are stable 
and there are no changes from historical levels of case 
outstanding strength 
7, 8, 9, 10 
4 U.S. PP Auto 
Increasing Claim 
Ratios 
U.S. private passenger automobile insurance in an 
environment of increasing claim ratios and no change 
in case outstanding strength 
7, 8, 9, 10 
5 U.S. PP Auto 
Increasing Case 
Outstanding Strength 
U.S. private passenger automobile insurance in an 
environment of stable claim ratios with an increase in 
case outstanding strength 
7, 8, 9, 10 
6 U.S. PP Auto 
Increasing Claim 
Ratios and Case 
Outstanding Strength 
U.S. private passenger automobile insurance in an 
environment where there are increases in both claim 
ratios and case outstanding strength 
7, 8, 9, 10 
7 U.S. Auto Steady-
State 
Combined portfolio of U.S. private passenger and 
commercial automobile insurance in a steady-state 
environment where there is no change in the product 
mix 
7, 8, 9, 10 
8 U.S. Auto Changing 
Product Mix 
Combined portfolio of U.S. private passenger and 
commercial automobile insurance in an environment 
where the volume of commercial automobile insurance 
is increasing at a faster rate than the private passenger 
automobile insurance 
7, 8, 9, 10 
9 Auto BI Insurer Insurer’s private passenger automobile bodily injury 
portfolio in one jurisdiction 
8 
10 GL Self-Insurer Self-insur er’s general liability program 8 
11 Auto Collision 
Insurer 
Insurer’s private passenger automobile collision 
portfolio  
11 
12 WC Self-Insurer Self-insurer’s U.S. workers compensation program 11 
13 GL Insurer Insurer’s occurrence basis general liability insurance 
portfolio  
11 
14 Self-Insurer Case 
Only 
Self-insurer with case outstanding only data available 
for historical years for general liability coverage 
12 
15 Berq-Sher Med Mal 
Insurer 
Insurer’s occurrence basis U.S. medical malpractice 
insurance portfolio  
13, 15 
16 Berq-Sher Auto BI 
Insurer 
Insurer’s U.S. automobile bodily injury liability 
insurance portfolio  
13, 15 
17 Auto Physical 
Damage Insurer 
Salvage and subrogation for auto physical damage 
insurance portfolio 
14 
18 DC Insurer Interim Reporting 15 
 
82

=== PDF PAGE 89 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
Readers should be aware that figures in the supporting exhibits for both Parts 3 and 4 are often 
carried to a greater number of decimals than shown. Thus, totals and calculations may not agree 
exactly due to rounding differences. 
83

=== PDF PAGE 90 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 – DEVELOPMENT TECHNIQUE 
 
 
In Chapter 5, we explain how to create a development triangle. Specifically, we build 
development triangles for paid claims, case outstanding, reported claims, and reported claim 
counts based on detailed information for a set of 15 claims observed over a four-year time 
horizon. In this chapter, we develop estimates of ultimate claims and unpaid claims based on the 
reported and paid claim development methods. The development technique, also known as the 
chain ladder technique, is one of the most frequently used methodologies for estimating unpaid 
claims.  
 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
The distinguishing characteristic of the development method is that ultimate claims for each 
accident year are produced from recorded values assuming that future claims’ development is 
similar to prior years’ development. In this method, the actuary uses the development triangles to 
track the development history of a specific group of claims. The underlying assumption in the 
development technique is that claims recorded to date will continue to develop in a similar manner 
in the future – that the past is indicative of the future. That is, the development technique assumes 
that the relative change in a given year’s claims from one evaluation point to the next is similar to 
the relative change in prior years’ claims at similar evaluation points.  
 
An implicit assumption in the development technique is that, for an immature accident year, the 
claims observed thus far tell you something about the claims yet to be observed. This is in 
contrast to the assumptions underlying the expected claims technique (Chapter 8), the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique (Chapter 9), and the Cape Cod technique (Chapter 10). 
 
Other important assumptions of the development method include: consistent claim processing, a 
stable mix of types of claims, stable policy limits, and stable reinsurance (or excess insurance) 
retention limits throughout the experience period. 
 
 
Common Uses of the Development Technique 
 
Actuaries apply the development technique to paid and reported claims as well as the number of 
claims. This technique is used with all lines of insurance including short-tail lines and long-tail 
lines. In order to use the development method, actuaries organize data in many different time 
intervals, including: 
 
 Accident year 
 Policy year 
 Underwriting year 
 Report year 
 Fiscal year
36 
 
                                                 
36Actuaries for self-insurers often conduct the actuarial analysis using the organization’s fiscal year time 
frame. For example, for a self-insured public entity with a fiscal year ending March 31, the actuary will 
likely organize the claim development data by April 1 to March 31 fiscal year. 
84

=== PDF PAGE 91 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
Actuaries also apply this technique to monthly, quarterly, and semiannual data. 
 
 
Mechanics of the Development Technique 
 
The development method consists of seven basic steps: 
 
 Step 1 – Compile claims data in a development triangle 
 Step 2 – Calculate age-to-age factors  
 Step 3 – Calculate averages of the age-to-age factors 
 Step 4 – Select claim development factors 
 Step 5 – Select tail factor 
 Step 6 – Calculate cumulative claim development factors 
 Step 7 – Project ultimate claims  
 
To demonstrate these seven steps, we begin with an example based on industry-aggregated 
accident year claim development data for U.S. private passenger automobile insurance.
37 This 
example is labeled “U.S. Industry Auto.” 
 
 
Step 1 – Compile Claims Data in a Development Triangle 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, we present the cumulative reported and paid claim development 
triangles, respectively. Each of these sheets contains four parts that follow the first five steps of 
our description of the development method. Part 1 of each exhibit includes the data triangle. In 
our example, the data triangles contain reported and paid claim development experience for 
accident years 1998 through 2007. There are ten diagonals in each triangle with annual valuation 
dates of December 31, 1998 through December 31, 2007. The reported and paid claims data 
contained in these exhibits are net of reinsurance and include the defense cost portion of claim 
adjustment expenses (labeled DCC for U.S. statutory accounting). 
 
 
Step 2 – Calculate Age-to-Age Factors 
 
The next step is to calculate age-to-age factors. These factors are also known as report-to-report 
factors or link ratios. They measure the change in recorded claims from one valuation date to the 
next. In Part 2 of Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, we present the age-to-age factors for U.S. Industry 
Auto. The standard naming convention for age-to-age factors is starting month-ending month. For 
example, the age-to-age factor for the 12-month period-to-the 24-month period is often referred to 
as the 12-24 factor (which is read as the 12-to-24 factor) or the 12-24 month factor. 
 
To calculate the age-to-age factors for the 12-month-to-24-month period, we divide the claims as 
of 24 months by the claims as of 12 months. Therefore, the triangle of age-to-age factors has one 
less row and one less column than the original data triangle.  
                                                 
37 The source of data is Best’s Aggregates & Averages. 
85

=== PDF PAGE 92 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
Using the reported claims presented in Exhibit I, Sheet 1, we calculate the following:  
 
 12-24 factor for accident year 1998  
  
= reported claims at 24 months for accident year 1998
 = $43,169,009 
   reported claims at 12 months for accident year 1998    $37,017,487 
 
= 1.166 
 
We provide a second example for the 36-month-to-48-month factor for accident year 2002: 
  
 36-48 factor for accident year 2002  
  
= reported claims at 48 months for accident year 2002
 = $57,703,851 
   reported claims at 36 months for accident year 2002    $56,102,312 
 
= 1.029 
 
We proceed in the same manner down the columns and across the rows of both the reported and 
paid claim triangles. 
 
 
Step 3 – Calculate Averages of the Age-to-Age Factors 
 
After completing the triangle of age-to-age factors, our next step is to calculate averages of the 
age-to-age factors. Actuaries use a wide variety of averages for age-to-age factors. Some of the 
most common averages include: 
 
 Simple (or arithmetic) average 
 Medial average (average excluding high and low values) 
 Volume-weighted average 
 Geometric average (the n
th  root of the product of n historical age-to-age factors) 
 
In Part 3 of Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, we present the following averages for U.S. Industry Auto: 
 
 Simple averages for the latest five years and the latest three years 
 
 Medial average for the latest five years excluding one high and one low value (medial latest 
5x1)38 
 
 Volume-weighted averages for the latest five years and the latest three years 
 
 Geometric average for the latest four years 
 
For reported claims, the 12-24 month simple average of the latest five factors is based on the 
average of the 12-24 month factors for accident years 2002 through 2006 and is equal to 1.168 
((1.184 + 1.162 + 1.159 + 1.160 + 1.173) / 5). The simple average of the latest three factors is 
                                                 
38 In the examples in this text, the medial average for two data points is the same as the simple average, and 
the medial average for one data point is simply the value of the data point. 
86

=== PDF PAGE 93 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
based on the 12-24 month factors for accident years 2004 through 2006 and is 1.164 ((1.159 
+1.160 + 1.173) / 3).  
 
To calculate the reported claims 24-36 month medial average development factor of the latest 
5x1, we consider the 24-36 month factors for accident years 2001 through 2005; we exclude the 
highest value (1.062 for accident year 2001) and the lowest value (1.055 for accident year 2004) 
and take an average of the remaining three values. The 24-36 month medial average of the latest 
5x1 is 1.057 ((1.059 + 1.057 + 1.056) / 3). 
 
The volume-weighted average is the weighted average using the amounts of reported claims (or 
paid claims) as weights. The formula for this type of average uses the sum of the claims for the 
specific number of years divided by the sum of the claims for the same years at the previous age. 
For example, the 36-48 month volume-weighted average of the latest three years is equal to the 
sum of the reported claims for accident years 2002 through 2004 as of 48 months ($57,703,851 + 
$57,015,411 + $56,976,657 = $171,695,919) divided by the sum of the reported claims for 
accident years 2002 through 2004 as of 36 months ($56,102,312 + $55,468,551 + $55,553,673 = 
$167,124,536), or 1.027. 
 
The geometric average (also known as the geometric mean) for the latest four years is equal to the 
fourth root of the product of the last four age-to-age factors. For example, the geometric average for 
the latest four years at 12-24 months is equal to (1.162 x 1.159 x 1.160 x 1.173)
 .25, or 1.164. 
Similarly, for 48-60 months, the geometric average for the latest four years is equal to (1.010 x 1.014 
x 1.011 x 1.010)
.25, or 1.011. 
 
For U.S. Industry Auto, we present various averages for the more recent diagonals. Actuaries 
often place greater reliance on the most recent experience as this data most likely reflects the 
effect of the latest changes in the insurer’s internal and external environments. The circumstances 
underlying the specific data grouping (including the nature of the line of business, the credibility 
of the available claims data, and changes in the insurer’s environment) should dictate the number 
of experience periods to include in the various averages. Similar to many actuarial decisions, 
there is often a trade-off between stability, which is represented by a greater number of 
experience periods included in the average values, and responsiveness, where only the most 
recent experience periods are considered. 
 
 
Step 4 – Select Claim Development Factors 
 
The selected age-to-age factor (also referred to as the selected claim development factor or 
selected loss development factor) represents the growth anticipated in the subsequent 
development interval. When selecting claim development factors, actuaries examine the historical 
claim development data, the age-to-age factors, and the various averages of the age-to-age 
factors. It is also common practice to review the prior year’s selection of claim development 
factors.39 
                                                 
39 A comparison to prior factors is important for several reasons. First, the actuary is able to compare his or 
her expectations at the prior valuation for development in the interval with actual experience. Second, an 
actuary is often balancing the conflicting goals of stability and responsiveness. By having the prior selected 
factors as a reference point, the actuary can consider the extent to which he or she wants to change selected 
claim development factors. Finally, it is valuable information to understand the effect of changes in 
development factors alone (or methodology) on the projected ultimate claims versus the effect of changes 
in the actual claim experience. 
87

=== PDF PAGE 94 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
When the credibility of the insurer’s own historical experience is limited, there may be a need to 
supplement the insurer’s own historical experience with certain benchmarks. One possible 
benchmark includes experience from similar lines with similar claims handling practices within 
the insurer. Another source of benchmarks is claim development patterns from the insurance 
industry when observable and considered to be comparable. Any benchmark must be utilized with 
caution, as there may be significant differences between the line of business being analyzed and 
the benchmark with regard to claims practices, policy coverages, underwriting, geographic mix, 
claim coding, policyholder deductibles and/or limits, legal precedents, etc. Such differences could 
make the development patterns noncomparable and increase the variability in the estimates of 
unpaid claims. (For further discussion on the use of industry benchmark experience, see Chapter 
3.
40) 
 
When selecting claim development factors, actuaries review the claim development experience 
for the following characteristics: 
 
― Smooth progression of individual age-to-age factors and average factors across development 
periods. Ideally, the pattern should demonstrate steadily decreasing incremental development 
from valuation to valuation (i.e., as we move further away from the accident period), especially in 
the later valuations. For U.S. Industry Auto, we observe decreasing values of age-to-age factors in 
virtually every interval (moving across the columns) for both reported claims and paid claims. 
 
― Stability of age-to-age factors for the same development period. Ideally, there should be a 
relatively small range of factors (small variance) within each development interval (i.e., down 
the columns). We look for stability of age-to-age factors and within the various averages for 
the same development period. In our example, there is considerable stability of factors 
especially for the factors in age intervals of 24-36 months and later. For both reported and 
paid claims, we observe the greatest variability in age-to-age factors at the 12-24 month 
period. This is not unexpected as claims at the earlier ages are at their most immature state, 
when the claims professional has the least amount of information about the circumstances of 
the insured event as well as the potential damages and injuries of claimants. 
 
― Credibility of the experience. Actuaries generally determine credibility based on the volume 
and the homogeneity of the experience for a given accident year and age. If the claim 
development experience of the insurer has limited credibility because of the limited volume 
of claims, organizational changes, or other factors, it may be necessary to use benchmark 
development factors from the insurance industry. (See the earlier discussion about the use of 
industry benchmarks.)  
 
― Changes in patterns. Actuaries review the age-to-age factors to identify systematic patterns 
that may suggest changes in the internal operations or external environment. We address this 
issue at length in Chapter 6. 
 
― Applicability of the historical experience. Actuaries determine the appropriateness of 
historical age-to-age factors for projecting future claim development based on qualitative 
information regarding changes in the book of business and insurer operations over time. 
Actuaries also consider the effect of changes in external factors that have not yet manifested 
themselves in the reported claims experience. 
                                                                                                                                                 
 
40 The Academy is on record for recommending against the reliance and heavy use of insurance industry 
benchmarks, unless necessary due to low credibility. 
88

=== PDF PAGE 95 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
In Part 4 of Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, we present our selected claim development factors for each 
age-to-age interval as well as the selected tail factors. (Tail factors are described in greater detail 
in the next section.) We use actuarial judgment to select these factors after reviewing all of the 
age-to-age factors, the various averages, and the prior year’s selected factors. In the exhibits, we 
use the label “To Ult” (i.e., To Ultimate) to designate the tail factor; in the following tables, we 
label the tail factors “120-Ultimate” (i.e., 120 months-to-ultimate). Both labels are commonly 
used by actuaries to indicate the selected tail development factor.  
 
We recognize that the selections of development factors are subjective and will likely differ from 
one actuary to another, perhaps materially, as the selection process involves significant actuarial 
judgment. When different actuaries apply their own experience and insight to the analysis of the 
same data, the selected age-to-age factors typically differ – sometimes by a small amount and 
sometimes by a large amount. It is important to appreciate that there is more than one reasonable 
selection of age-to-age and tail factors.  
 
Table 1, which is an excerpt from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, summarizes the selected reported and 
paid claim development factors by age-to-age interval for U.S. Industry Auto. 
 
Table 1 – Selected Age-to-Age Factors 
  
12-24 
 
24-36 
 
36-48 
 
48-60 
 
60-72 
 
72-84 
 
84-96 
96-
108 
108-
120 
120-
ultimate 
Reported 1.164 1.056 1.027 1.012 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 
Paid 1.702 1.186 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.002 1.002 
 
 
Step 5 – Select Tail Factor 
 
Earlier in this book we introduced the topic of the number of development periods needed for the 
analysis of unpaid claims. We asked whether it is necessary to analyze development through the 
3
rd maturity year, the 5th maturity year, the 10th or the 20th maturity year. If the data is available, 
the actuary should analyze development out to the point at which the development ceases (i.e., 
until the selected development factors are equal to 1.000).  The number of development periods 
required generally varies by line, jurisdiction, and data type. 
 
Sometimes the data does not provide for enough development periods. This occurs when the 
development factors for the most mature development periods available are still significantly 
greater than 1.000.
41 When this occurs, the actuary will need to determine a tail factor to bring the 
claims from the latest observable development period to an ultimate value.   
 
For some lines of insurance and some types of claims data, the tail factor can be especially 
difficult to select due to the limited availability of relevant data. The point of development 
beyond which no tail factor is required varies tremendously by line of business. For short-tail 
coverages, insurers generally settle claims within months or a few years of the accident date. 
However, for long-tail lines of business, such as U.S. medical professional liability and workers 
compensation, some claims can take more than fifteen years to reach final settlement.  
                                                 
41 There are some cases in which the development at the end of the triangle is often less than one, such as 
for a line of business with significant subrogation activity after claims are paid. For these lines of business, 
the desire is still to have sufficient periods in the development triangle so that non-zero development 
ceases, but in this case the development factors may approach 1.000 from below. 
89

=== PDF PAGE 96 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
In 1978, Joseph O. Thorne discussed the potential difficulty in selecting tail factors based on 
historical data in his review of the Berquist and Sherman paper “Loss Reserve Adequacy Testing: 
A Comprehensive, Systematic Approach.” Mr. Thorne noted: 
 
Care must be taken in projecting the tail from older accident years to recent 
accident years. For example, in Workers’ Compensation the tail percentage may 
increase due to trends in cumulative injury, shifts to unlimited medical benefits, 
and increases in the proportion of pension claims. On the other hand, the 
percentage may decrease due to trends in settlement practices for lump sum 
awards of for compromise and release of claims. The effects of certain factors 
may be quantified by analysis of loss experience (such as claims by size or injury 
type) or by specific sampling; other factors may require considerable judgment.
42  
 
Thorne’s comments are equally applicable today. The tail factor is crucial as it influences the 
unpaid claim estimate for all accident years (in the experience period) and can create a 
disproportionate leverage on the total estimated unpaid claims. The tail factor, or a similar 
concept, plays an important role not only in the development technique but in almost every 
technique discussed in Part 3 – Basic Techniques for Estimating Unpaid Claims.  
 
Actuaries use several approaches to evaluate the tail factor. One approach is to rely on industry 
benchmark development factors. (See previous discussions regarding use of industry 
benchmarks.) Another common approach is to fit a curve to the selected or observed development 
factors to extrapolate the tail factors; exponential decay is a common assumption for such curve 
fitting. A third approach, used for paid development where the comparable reported development 
is already considered to be at ultimate, is to utilize reported-to-paid ratios at the latest observed 
paid development period. A more in-depth discussion of this topic is beyond the scope of this 
text. We recommend that the actuary seek additional information on this topic through the 
actuarial literature available on the CAS Web Site and the CAS Tail Factors Working Party. 
 
For the U.S. Industry Auto example, we select a reported claim tail factor of 1.000; we also select 
an age-to-age factor of 1.000 for the 108-120 month interval. This means that we do not expect 
any further development on reported claims after 108 months. For paid claims, however, we 
expect future development beyond 108 months; we select a 1.002 age-to-age factor for 108-120 
months and a tail factor of 1.002 (based on the typical ratio of reported to paid claims at this age). 
 
 
Step 6 – Calculate Cumulative Claim Development Factors (CDF) 43 
 
We calculate cumulative claim development factors by successive multiplications beginning with 
the tail factor and the oldest age-to-age factor. The cumulative claim development factor projects 
the total growth over the remaining valuations. Cumulative claim development factors are also 
known as age-to-ultimate factors and claim development factors to ultimate.  
                                                 
42 PCAS, 1978. 
 
43 As noted previously, we specifically choose to use the terminology claims instead of losses in this text. 
Thus, we use CDF for claim development factor to ultimate. Many actuaries use the term losses and thus 
LDF to represent the loss development factor to ultimate. In South Africa, actuaries often use LDF to refer 
to the incremental loss development factor and UDF to refer to the cumulative loss development factor or 
loss development factor to ultimate. The important message for the actuary is that he or she must 
understand the terminology, including abbreviations, for any analysis. 
90

=== PDF PAGE 97 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
Based on the selected age-to-age factors from Step 4 and the tail factor in Step 5, we calculate the 
following: 
 
 Reported CDF at 120 months 
= selected tail (120-ultimate) factor 
= 1.000 
 
Reported CDF at 108 months 
= (selected tail factor) x (selected development factor 108-120 months) 
= 1.000 x 1.000 
= 1.000 
 
 Reported CDF at 96 months 
= (selected tail factor) x (selected development factor 108-120 months) x  
   (selected development factor 96-108 months) 
= (CDF at 108 months) x (selected development factor 96-108 months) 
= 1.000 x 1.001  
= 1.001 
 
 And so on, until we get to 
 
Reported CDF at 12 months 
= (CDF at 24 months) x (selected development factor 12-24 months) 
= 1.110 x 1.164  
= 1.292 
 
We calculate cumulative claim development factors for paid claims in the same manner. 
 
Table 2, which is an excerpt from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, summarizes the cumulative claim 
development factors based on the selected age-to-age factors. 
 
Table 2 – Cumulative Claim Development Factors 
 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 
Reported 1.292 1.110 1.051 1.023 1.011 1.006 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 
Paid 2.390 1.404 1.184 1.085 1.040 1.020 1.011 1.006 1.004 1.002 
 
Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate a typical relationship between reporting and payment patterns for 
many lines of P&C insurance: cumulative paid claim development factors are usually greater than 
cumulative reported claim development factors at the same maturity age. 
 
 
Step 7 – Project Ultimate Claims 
 
Ultimate claims are equal to the product of the latest valuation of claims (the amounts shown on 
the last diagonal of the claim triangles) and the appropriate cumulative claim development 
factors. In our example, the latest diagonal of the triangle is the December 31, 2007 valuation. 
Each accident year has an associated age at December 31, 2007. For example, accident year 2007 
as of December 31, 2007 is 12 months old. Accident year 2006 as of December 31, 2007 is 24 
months old. Similarly, in this example, the oldest accident year in our experience period is 1998 
91

=== PDF PAGE 98 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
which, at December 31, 2007, is 120 months old. We determine the appropriate cumulative claim 
development factor based on the age of each accident year; we then multiply each accident year’s 
reported (and paid) claims at the latest valuation by its age-to-ultimate factor (i.e., cumulative 
claim development factor).  
 
Detailed calculations are presented in Exhibit I, Sheet 3. The first column of Exhibit I, Sheet 3, is 
the accident year. Our example for U.S. Industry Auto includes accident years 1998 through 
2007. In the second column, we show the age of each accident year as of the latest valuation of 
claims (i.e., December 31, 2007). Columns (3) and (4) summarize reported and paid claims, 
respectively, by accident year at December 31, 2007. Column (3) is the last diagonal of the 
reported claim development triangle in Exhibit I, Sheet 1, and Column (4) is the last diagonal of 
the paid claim development triangle in Exhibit I, Sheet 2. Columns (5) and (6) are the cumulative 
claim development factors that are calculated in Step 5. Each cumulative claim development 
factor refers to a specific age.  
 
Projected ultimate claims based on the reported claim development method are equal to the latest 
valuation of reported claims multiplied by the cumulative reported claim development factors. 
(See Column (7) of Exhibit I, Sheet 3.) For example, projected ultimate claims for accident year 
1998 are calculated as follows: 
 
 Projected ultimate claims for accident year 1998 
 = (reported claims for 1998 as of 12/ 31/07) x (reported CDF at 120 months) 
 = $47,742,304 x 1.000 
 = $47,742,304 
 
And for accident year 2007, 
 
 Projected ultimate claims for accident year 2007 
 = (reported claims for 2007 as of 12/ 31/07) x (reported CDF at 12 months) 
 = $48,853,563 x 1.292 
 = $63,118,803 
 
We perform similar calculations for the projection of ultimate claims using the paid claim 
development technique (Column (8) of Exhibit I, Sheet 3). For example, projected ultimate 
claims for accident year 2007 are calculated as follows: 
 
 Projected ultimate claims for accident year 2007 
 = (paid claims for 2007 as of 12/31/07) x (paid CDF at 12 months) 
 = $27,229,969 x 2.390 
 = $65,079,626 
 
 
Unpaid Claim Estimate Based on the Development Technique 
 
For each technique presented in this text, we derive an unpaid claim estimate. Using the 
development technique, actuaries calculate the unpaid claim estimate as the difference between 
projected ultimate claims and actual paid claims. Because we are using accident year data, this 
value of the unpaid claim estimate represents total unpaid claims including both case outstanding 
and the broad definition of IBNR. To determine estimated IBNR based on the development 
technique, we subtract reported claims from the projected ultimate claims. Alternatively, IBNR is 
equal to the estimate of total unpaid claims less case outstanding. 
92

=== PDF PAGE 99 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 4, we summarize the calculations for the unpaid claim estimate based on the 
example for U.S. Industry Auto. Columns (2) and (3) contain reported and paid claims data as of 
December 31, 2007, which are the latest diagonals in our claim development triangles. Columns 
(4) and (5) are the projected ultimate claims, which we developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 3. We 
summarize case outstanding in Column (6); case outstanding is equal to the difference between 
reported and paid claims as of December 31, 2007 (Column (2) – Column (3)). Estimated IBNR 
is equal to projected ultimate claims minus reported claims. Estimated IBNR based on the 
reported claim development technique is calculated in Column (7), and Column (8) shows the 
results of the paid claim development technique. The estimate of total unpaid claims is equal to 
the sum of case outstanding and estimated IBNR. We present the total unpaid claim estimate in 
Columns (9) and (10) based on the reported and paid claim development techniques, respectively. 
 
 
Reporting and Payment Patterns 
 
Actuaries describe the reporting pattern of claims as the percentage of ultimate claims that are 
reported in each year. We can derive implied reporting patterns from the cumulative reported 
claim development factors.44 The following table shows the cumulative reported claim 
development factors and the associated reporting pattern for U.S. Industry Auto. 
 
Table 3 – Reporting Pattern 
 
Age 
(Months) 
Cumulative  
Reported Claim  
Development Factors 
 
Cumulative % 
Reported 
 
Incremental % 
Reported 
12 1.292 77.4% 77.4% 
24 1.110 90.1% 12.7% 
36 1.051 95.1% 5.0% 
48 1.023 97.8% 2.7% 
60 1.011 98.9% 1.1% 
72 1.006 99.4% 0.5% 
84 1.003 99.7% 0.3% 
96 1.001 99.9% 0.2% 
108 1.000 100.0% 0.1% 
120 1.000 100.0% 0.0% 
 
The percentage reported is equal to the inverse of the cumulative claim development factor. For 
example, at 12 months, the percentage reported is equal to 1.000 divided by 1.292 or 77.4%; in 
other words, our selected reported claim development factors imply that 77.4% of ultimate claims 
are reported through 12 months. Similarly at 24 months, the percentage reported is equal to 1.000 
divided by 1.110 or 90.1%; the selected reported claim development factors indicate that 90.1% 
of claims are reported through 24 months. 
 
In the preceding table, we also show the incremental percentage reported. These values are equal 
to the difference in the cumulative percentage reported at successive ages. For example, the 
incremental percentage reported for the first 12 months is 77.4%, which is equal to the 
                                                 
44 In Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques, we present an alternative approach for determining reporting 
and payment patterns based on a comparison of the reported and paid claim development triangles to 
selected ultimate claims. This alternative approach is routinely used by actuaries in Canada to determine 
payment patterns (also known as emergence patterns in Canada) for present value discounting purposes. 
93

=== PDF PAGE 100 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
cumulative percentage reported at 12 months. The incremental percentage reported for the 12-24 
month period is equal to 90.1% minus 77.4%, or 12.7%.  
 
We can also determine an implied payment pattern based on the cumulative paid claim 
development factors. In the following table, we present the cumulative paid claim development 
factors and the associated payment patterns (cumulative and incremental) for U.S. Industry Auto. 
 
Table 4 – Payment Pattern 
 
Age 
(Months) 
Cumulative  
Paid Claim  
Development Factors 
 
Cumulative % 
Paid 
 
Incremental % 
Paid 
12 2.390 41.8% 41.8% 
24 1.404 71.2% 29.4% 
36 1.184 84.5% 13.3% 
48 1.085 92.2% 7.7% 
60 1.040 96.2% 4.0% 
72 1.020 98.0% 1.8% 
84 1.011 98.9% 0.9% 
96 1.006 99.4% 0.5% 
108 1.004 99.6% 0.2% 
120 1.002 99.8% 0.2% 
 
In the U.S. Industry Auto example, which contains the aggregated results for U.S. private 
passenger automobile liability, we observe that the incremental percentages reported and paid in 
each successive interval are less than or equal to that of the previous age interval. Actuaries often 
observe such patterns for many lines of P&C insurance, consistent with reasonable expectations 
for the underlying process of settling a portfolio of claims. Where the underlying development 
patterns are erratic, actuaries frequently incorporate increased levels of actuarial judgment into 
the selection process to achieve claim development patterns that exhibit such a steady, decreasing 
pattern. 
 
It is worthwhile to note that while the above payment and reporting patterns might serve as a 
reasonable model for the expected payment and reporting of future claims, the development 
method implies somewhat different patterns for each of the accident years from 1998 through 
2007. This is due to the fact that the emerged portion of each accident year does not precisely fit 
the selected age-to-age factors. 
 
The reporting and payment patterns may be valuable input for other actuarial calculations. They 
can be used in other techniques for estimating unpaid claims and in monitoring the development 
of claims during the year. The payment pattern
45 is also often used for present value (i.e., 
discounting) calculations.  
 
 
                                                 
45 In Canada, actuaries typically refer to an emergence pattern as the payment pattern used for discounting 
purposes. This is a different terminology from that used by U.S. actuaries who generally use the term 
emergence to refer to the reporting pattern of either claims or claim counts. 
94

=== PDF PAGE 101 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
Observations and Common Relationships  
 
Generally, cumulative claim development factors are the greatest for the most recent accident 
years and the smallest for the oldest accident years. Actuaries refer to the most recent, less-
developed accident years as immature and the oldest, most-developed accident years as mature. 
As a result, it is common to find the highest values of estimated IBNR for the most recent 
accident years, or the less mature years. As accident years mature and more claims are reported 
and settled, the estimate of total unpaid claims, which is comprised of case outstanding and 
estimated IBNR, will gradually approach zero.  
 
Another common phenomenon is that development factors tend to increase as the retention 
increases. In 1987, E. Pinto and D.F. Gogol published a paper titled “An Analysis of Excess Loss 
Development.”
46 Upon a review of excess claim development experience published by the RAA, 
they observed: 
 
Since the data indicates that excess business generally exhibits much slower 
reporting than that normally associated with primary business, there appears to be 
a relationship between the layer for which business is written and the resulting 
development pattern. It is this relationship that we intend to analyze in this paper 
for both paid and reported losses. Applications to increased limits and excess of 
loss pricing are also noted. 
 
The protracted development of excess losses reflected in the RAA study suggests 
that the development is not only caused by late reported claims and increases in 
the average reported loss per claim but also by changes at successive maturities 
in the proportion of claims with losses which are large multiples of the average. 
Thus, the shape of the size of loss distribution changes at successive valuations. 
 
Pinto and Gogol reviewed ISO excess of loss data as well as RAA data, and in both sets of data 
they observed that claim development increases as the retention increases. They developed a 
model which illustrates the two influences underlying claim development: the reporting pattern of 
claims over time and the changing characteristics of the size of claims distribution at successive 
maturities. Pinto and Gogol noted that without the latter influence, the development factors for 
claims in excess of different retentions would be identical. They conclude their paper as follows: 
 
The results that have been produced indicate clearly that loss and ALAE 
development varies significantly by retention. Accordingly, pricing and reserving 
estimates incorporating development factors may be substantially in error if this 
is not taken into account. As this applies to paid as well as reported loss 
development, recognition of retention is also a major factor in estimating 
discounted losses using paid development factors. 
 
 
When the Development Technique Works and When it Does Not  
 
The development technique is based on the premise that we can predict future claims activity for 
an accident year (or policy year, report year, etc.) based on historical claims activity to date for 
that accident year. The primary assumption of this technique is that the reporting and payment of 
future claims will be similar to the patterns observed in the past. When used with reported claims, 
                                                 
46 PCAS, 1987. 
95

=== PDF PAGE 102 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
there is an implicit assumption that there have been no significant changes in the adequacy of 
case outstanding during the experience period; when used with paid claims, there is an implicit 
assumption that there have been no significant changes during the experience period in the speed 
of claims closure and payment. Thus, the development method is appropriate for insurers in a 
relatively stable environment. When there are no major organizational changes for the insurer and 
when there are no major external environmental changes, the development technique is an 
appropriate method to use in combination with other techniques for estimating unpaid claims.  
 
However, if there are any changes to the insurer’s operations (e.g., new claims processing 
systems; revisions to tabular formulae for case outstanding; or changes in claims management 
philosophy, policyholder deductibles, or the insurer’s reinsurance limits), the assumption that the 
past will be predictive of the future may not hold true. Environmental changes can also invalidate 
the primary assumption of the development technique. For example, when a major tort reform 
occurs (such as a cap on claim settlements or a restriction in the statute of limitations), actuaries 
may no longer be able to assume that historical claim development experience will be predictive 
of future claims experience. In such situations, the actuary should consider alternative techniques 
for estimating unpaid claims, or at the very least, adjust the selected claim development factors. 
 
The development technique requires a large volume of historical claims experience. It works best 
when the presence or absence of large claims does not greatly distort the data. If the volume of 
data is not sufficient, large claims could greatly distort the age-to-age factors, the projection of 
ultimate claims, and finally the estimate of unpaid claims using a development method. As noted 
in “The Actuary and IBNR” by R.L. Bornhuetter and R.E. Ferguson
47, a strictly fortuitous event 
such as an unusual large claims should not distort an insurer’s estimate of IBNR. There are 
circumstances, however, such as a large winter storm or other catastrophe, in which the insurer’s 
IBNR should likely increase. 
 
For an insurer entering a new line of business or a new territory, a sufficient volume of credible 
claim development data may not be available. For some smaller insurers with limited portfolios, 
historical claim development data may not be sufficiently credible for the actuary to use the 
development technique. It should be noted that in such situations the development technique is 
still often used. However, actuaries in these situations typically rely on benchmark patterns (such 
as from comparable lines of business or available industry data, as discussed earlier) to select 
claim development factors, which they then apply to the insurer’s latest valuation of claims. 
 
The development technique is particularly suitable for high-frequency, low-severity lines with 
stable and relatively timely reporting of claims, especially where the claims are evenly spread 
throughout the accident year (or policy year, report year, etc.) – that is, the volume of claims 
experience is not changing significantly from one year to the next.  
 
Where there is not an even spread of claims throughout the year, the development technique can 
distort the projected ultimate claims for an accident year. This is a result of the potential for a 
significant difference in the average claim maturity. To understand why this is the case, it is 
helpful to think in terms of the individual claims making up the accident year. An accident year 
includes individual claims that occur throughout the accident year. Some occur in the first month 
of the year, some in the sixth month, and some in the last month. The average occurrence date of 
claims (if the exposure is evenly spread throughout the year) occurs in the middle of the year. A 
cumulative development factor for an accident year at 12 months can be thought of as an average 
of factors for the January accident month at 12 months, the February accident month at 11 
                                                 
47 PCAS, 1972 
96

=== PDF PAGE 103 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
months, …, ending with the December accident mont h at 1 month. If the historic data had an even 
spread of claims across the months, but the most recent accident year had an uneven spread due to 
a large storm or other event in the last month or due to an increase in the exposures over the year, 
the historical data will have an average occurrence date that is not comparable to the most recent 
accident year.     
 
For long-tail lines of insurance, such as U.S. workers compensation and general liability, the 
cumulative claim development factors can become very large for the most recent accident years, 
particularly when using the paid claim development technique. Actuaries often speak of the 
leveraged effect of claim development factors with high values. For example, if the cumulative 
reported claim development factor is 4.00, each dollar of reported claims is multiplied by a factor 
of 4.00 to determine ultimate claims. It is not unusual for long-tail lines of insurance to have 
cumulative paid claim development factors greater than 10.00. These highly leveraged factors 
result in projections of ultimate claims that are very sensitive to the current value of paid and 
reported claims. The presence or absence of large claims as well as any unusual change in the 
reporting or settlement of claims (or sometimes just a single claim) can result in unreasonable 
projections of ultimate claims for the most recent accident years. In situations of highly leveraged 
cumulative claim development factors, actuaries often seek alternative techniques for estimating 
unpaid claims. 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheets 1 through 4, we continue the example introduced in Chapter 6 for XYZ 
Insurer. This example is for an insurer of private passenger automobile bodily injury liability in a 
single jurisdiction that has experienced numerous operational and environmental changes. During 
meetings, claims department management highlighted changes in the rate of claims settlement 
and in the strength of case outstanding. During the experience period, this jurisdiction 
implemented major tort reform aimed at modifying the liability covered by the insurance product. 
The result of the tort reform was a change in the insurance product as well as a change in the 
insurer’s market presence. 
 
Before we even begin with the calculations, we need to examine whether or not the development 
technique is appropriate for XYZ Insurer. Again, the underlying premise of the development 
method is that future claims activity can be projected based on historical claims experience. A 
primary assumption of the reported claim development method is that there have been no 
significant changes in the adequacy of case outstanding over the experience period, and a primary 
assumption of the paid claim development method is that there have been no significant changes 
in the rate of settlement over the experience period. These methods also assume that the type of 
claim has not changed during the period and the claim reporting lags (i.e., the time between date 
of occurrence and date of report) have not changed.  
 
Based on the information we gathered through meetings with management of XYZ Insurer and 
through our actuarial diagnostic review, we question whether the development technique is in fact 
appropriate. We know that there have been changes in the case outstanding adequacy as well as 
changes in the rate at which claims are closed. We also know that there have been changes in the 
claim environment due to the tort reform. Therefore, the underlying assumptions do not hold true, 
and we must conclude that some type of adjustment for these changes is necessary for the 
development technique to be appropriate for XYZ Insurer. 
 
97

=== PDF PAGE 104 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
For purposes of demonstration and comparison to other methods that we will present in later 
chapters, we show the calculations for the development technique in Exhibit II, Sheets 1 through 
4, for XYZ Insurer. We organize the exhibits similarly to Exhibit I, Sheets 1 through 4. Exhibit II, 
Sheets 1 and 2, contain the reported and paid claim development triangles, respectively. The 
challenge of selecting age-to-age factors is much greater for the actuary in this example than in 
the prior example. There is significant variability in the age-to-age factors down each column of 
the triangle. For the reported claim triangle, almost all of the age-to-age factors along the 
December 31, 2004 diagonal are the highest in each column; the latest diagonal of age-to-age 
factors is the lowest value in many of the columns. Based on our knowledge of the changing 
environment, we expect such variability in the age-to-age factors. In our example, we select age-
to-age factors based on the volume-weighted average of the latest two years. (Keep in mind other 
factor selections may also be reasonable.) In a situation of such major change, an actuary would 
typically need to exercise a higher degree of judgment in selecting the age-to-age factors. 
 
We present projected ultimate claims based on the development technique applied to reported and 
paid claims in Exhibit II, Sheet 3. In Exhibit II, Sheet 4, we summarize estimated IBNR and the 
total unpaid claim estimate based on the two development projections. In our first example for 
U.S. Industry Auto, the estimated IBNR generated by the reported and paid claim development 
methods differs by approximately 10% and the estimate of total unpaid claims differs by only 4%. 
In our second example for XYZ Insurer, the estimated IBNR using the paid claim development 
technique differs by 138% from the reported claims indication; the total unpaid claim estimate 
differs by almost 50%. These differences suggest that the actuary should review alternative 
projection methods. 
 
 
Influence of a Changing Environment on the Claim Development Technique 
 
Changes in Claim Ratios48 and Case Outstanding Adequacy 
 
To examine the effect of a changing environment on the estimates produced by the development 
technique, we construct an example based on characteristics seen in the U.S. private passenger 
automobile example. We use similar reporting and payment patterns as well as a similar ultimate 
claim ratio. We compare the estimated IBNR generated by the development technique to the 
“actual IBNR”
49 under the following four scenarios:  
 
 Scenario 1 is a steady-state environment where claim ratios are stable and there are no 
changes from historical levels of case outstanding strength (U.S. PP Auto Steady-State) 
 
 Scenario 2 is an environment of increasing claim ratios and no change in case outstanding 
strength (U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios) 
 
 Scenario 3 is an environment of stable claim ratios with an increase in case outstanding 
strength (U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength) 
 
 Scenario 4 is an environment where there are increases in both claim ratios and case 
outstanding strength (U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength) 
                                                 
48 Because we specifically chose to use the term claims instead of losses, we refer to a claim ratio instead of 
a loss ratio. This claim ratio should be understood to refer to dollars of claims and not claim counts.  
 
49 See the next section, “Key Assumptions,” for description of “actual IBNR.” 
98

=== PDF PAGE 105 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
We will continue to use this example with its four scenarios in Chapters 8, 9, and 10. (Note that 
Scenarios 1 through 4 are labeled Examples 3 through 6 in the summary table in the Introduction 
to Part 3 – Basic Techniques for Estimating Unpaid Claims.) 
 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
In real-life situations, actuaries know neither the “actual” claim development patterns nor the 
“actual” ultimate claim ratios prior to final settlement and closure for any particular accident year. 
However, for the purpose of demonstrating the effect of a changing environment, we design a 
model in which we can calculate the “actual” or “true” IBNR requirement. In developing this 
example, we use a ten-year experience period, accident years 1999 through 2008. We assume that 
the earned premium for the first year (i.e., 1999) is $1 million. We then assume a 5% annual 
premium trend to develop earned premium values for each subsequent year in the experience 
period. 
 
In Exhibit III, Sheet 1, we summarize the key assumptions and calculate the actual IBNR for each 
scenario. The actual IBNR is equal to the ultimate claims projection, which is based on the given 
ultimate claim ratio for each accident year, minus the reported claims as of December 31, 2008. 
 
The following table summarizes the assumed reporting and payment patterns for the steady-state 
environment. 
 
Table 5 – Key Assumptions 
Steady-State Environment 
Reporting and Payment Patterns 
 
As of Month 
% 
Reported 
% 
Paid 
12 77% 42% 
24 90% 71% 
36 95% 84% 
48 98% 92% 
60 99% 96% 
72 99% 98% 
84 100% 99% 
96 100% 99% 
108 100% 100% 
120 100% 100% 
 
99

=== PDF PAGE 106 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
In the steady-state environment, we assume an ultimate claim ratio of 70% for all ten accident 
years in the experience period (i.e., 1999 through 2008). For the increasing claim ratio scenarios, 
we assume the following claim ratios by accident year: 
 
Table 6 – Key Assumptions  
Increasing Claim Ratio Scenarios  
Accident Year Ultimate Claim Ratio 
1999-2003 70% 
2004 80% 
2005 85% 
2006 90% 
2007 95% 
2008 100% 
 
We use the earned premium and ultimate claim ratios as well as the given reporting and payment 
patterns to create reported and paid claim development triangles for each of the four scenarios 
previously described. Claim development triangles are presented in Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 
9.  
 
To simplify the presentation of the various scenarios, we always select reported and paid age-to-
age factors based on a five-year volume-weighted average. When selecting age-to-age factors, an 
actuary would typically review several different types of averages as well as various claims 
diagnostics. Actuaries incorporate significant judgment when selecting age-to-age factors to 
respond to changes in the environment, both internal and external. By not responding in our 
examples to the changes in the environment with judgmental adjustments, we further demonstrate 
how the development technique reacts to a changing situation. 
 
 
Scenario 1 – U.S. PP Auto Steady-State  
 
Not surprisingly, the projected ultimate claims are the same for both the reported and paid claim 
development methods in the steady-state environment. Both methods generate estimated IBNR 
that is equal to the actual IBNR. We present calculations for the steady-state environment in the 
top section of Exhibit III, Sheet 10.  
 
 
Scenario 2 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios  
 
In the bottom section of Exhibit III, Sheet 10, we present the calculations for the second scenario, 
increasing claim ratios with no change in case outstanding strength. The first thing we notice 
when comparing the top and bottom sections of Exhibit III, Sheet 10, is the differences between 
reported and paid claims in Columns (3) and (4). We can also see similar differences in the claim 
development triangles. The claim development triangles in Exhibit III, Sheets 4 and 5 (increasing 
claim ratio scenario) are the same as the triangles in Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 3 (steady-state) for 
accident years 1999 through 2003. However, beginning in accident year 2004, the reported and 
paid claims for all remaining years are higher for the increasing claim ratio scenario than the 
steady-state scenario. This is consistent with our assumption of increasing claim ratios for 
accident years 2004 through 2008.  
 
100

=== PDF PAGE 107 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
It is important to recognize that since we assume no change in the adequacy of case outstanding, 
there are no changes in the age-to-age factors. Thus, there are no changes in the cumulative claim 
development factors between the increasing claim ratio scenario and the steady-state 
environment. (Compare Columns (6) and (7) in the top and bottom sections of Exhibit III, Sheet 
10.) In Exhibit III, Sheet 10, we note that the projected ultimate claims are the same for the 
reported and paid claim development techniques, and that they are significantly greater for the 
increasing claim ratio scenario ($10,249,350 for all years combined) than for the steady-state 
environment ($8,804,525 for all years combined). Since the claim development factors to 
ultimate are the same, the higher value of projected ultimate claims is solely due to higher values 
of claims reported and paid as of December 31, 2008. We observe that the estimated IBNR, 
which is the same for both the reported and paid claim development methods, are equal to the 
actual IBNR in this scenario. Thus, we can conclude that the development technique is responsive 
to changes in the underlying claim ratios assuming no changes in the underlying claims reporting 
or payment pattern.  
 
 
Scenario 3 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength 
 
Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 7 contain the claim development triangles for this scenario; we present 
detailed calculations for projected ultimate claims and estimated IBNR in the top section of 
Exhibit III, Sheet 11. In building the reported claim development triangle, we assume that the 
case outstanding adequacy increased by 6% in 2007 and 25% in 2008 over the steady-state case 
outstanding (for the latest four accident years only). Thus, the next to last diagonal of the case 
outstanding triangle is 6% greater in this scenario than the steady-state scenario; and the last 
diagonal of the case outstanding triangle is 25% greater in this scenario than the steady-state 
scenario. Since reported claims are comprised of the sum of case outstanding and paid claims, a 
change in the case outstanding triangle will result in changes to the reported claim triangle. These 
changes result in changes in the age-to-age factors along the latest two diagonals and changes in 
the cumulative reported claim development factors. 
 
Before we review the detailed calculations, we can discuss conceptually what we expect to see 
happen with the projections. The true ultimate claims have not changed from the steady-state 
environment. Ultimate claims for this scenario are equal to 70% of earned premium for each year 
in the experience period. We should have higher values of reported claims since we know that 
case outstanding strength has increased. For example, where case outstanding are $380,075 for 
accident year 2008 in the steady-state environment, they are now $475,094. Given the same value 
of ultimate claims with higher values of reported claims at December 31, 2008, the IBNR should 
decrease. The actual IBNR
50 for the scenario of stable claim ratios and increases in case 
outstanding strength are $253,336 (for all years combined); these are lower than the actual IBNR 
of the steady-state, which are $438,638. 
 
We now turn to the detailed calculations in the top section of Exhibit III, Sheet 11. When we 
compare the projections of Scenario 3 with those of the steady-state environment, we observe 
several differences. First, for accident years 2005 through 2008, reported claims in Column (3) 
are greater than the reported claims of the steady-state. We also note that the reported claim 
development factors to ultimate (Column (6)) are higher for the latest three accident years in 
Scenario 3 than in the steady-state scenario. Projected ultimate claims based on the reported claim 
                                                 
50 Recall that we are using the broad definition of IBNR that includes both pure IBNR and case 
development on known claims (incurred but not enough reported or IBNER). The actual pure IBNR 
remains the same regardless of changes in the adequacy of case outstanding. 
101

=== PDF PAGE 108 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
development technique are greater in Scenario 3 than the steady-state projection due to both 
higher reported claims and higher cumulative claim development factors.  
 
This example brings us to the conclusion that without adjustment, the reported claim development 
method overstates the projected ultimate claims and thus the IBNR in times of increasing case 
outstanding strength. There are two forces at play in this scenario. First, the reported claims are 
greater along the latest diagonal due to the increase in case outstanding adequacy. Second, the 
age-to-age factors are also higher along the latest two diagonals where the insurer strengthened 
the adequacy of the case outstanding. Unless the actuary mechanically or judgmentally adjusts for 
such change, an increase in case outstanding adequacy can lead to higher cumulative claim 
development factors. (We will discuss some methods that the actuary could use for such 
adjustments in Chapter 13.) We are then multiplying a higher value of reported claims by a higher 
cumulative claim development factor. The result is a projected value of ultimate claims that likely 
overstates the estimate of total unpaid claims.  
 
Looking back at the underlying assumptions of the development technique, we recall that the key 
assumption of this technique is that claims reported to date will continue in a similar manner in 
the future. That is, the development technique assumes that the relative change in a given year’s 
claims from one evaluation point to the next is similar to the relative change in prior years’ claims 
at similar evaluation points. In times of changing case outstanding adequacy, this assumption no 
longer holds true for reported claims. Since case outstanding are now more adequate than they 
have been historically, we actually need a lower CDF-to-ultimate factor not a higher factor. In 
order to produce the actual value of ultimate claims, the cumulative claim development factors 
should be lower than that of the steady-state environment, not higher. 
 
Case outstanding at December 31, 2008 are equal to $977,641, which is the difference between 
total reported claims and total paid claims, and the actual IBNR for Scenario 3 are $253,336. The 
true total value of unpaid claims at December 31, 2008 is equal to the sum of the actual IBNR and 
the case outstanding, or $1,230,997. The difference between the actual unpaid claims and the 
estimate of unpaid claims resulting from the reported claim development technique is significant. 
The total unpaid claim estimate based on the reported claim development technique is $1,478,573 
(projected ultimate claims in Column (8) minus paid claims in Column (4)) which is 20% greater 
than the actual unpaid claims. The difference between the actual unpaid claims and the estimated 
unpaid claims generated by the reported claim development method is $247,596. From a calendar 
year financial reporting perspective, this adds 16 points to the 2008 calendar year claim ratio 
($247,596 divided by the 2008 earned premium of $1,551,328). (This assumes that the insurer 
reports all of the difference in calendar year 2008.) 
 
Because only the case outstanding are affected in Scenario 3, there are no differences between the 
paid claim development triangles of Scenario 3 and the steady-state environment. Since there are 
no differences in the paid claim triangles, the age-to-age factors, claim development factors to 
ultimate, and projected ultimate claims all remain the same as the steady-state scenario. The 
estimated IBNR, which is equal to projected ultimate claims less reported claims at December 31, 
2008, is lower for this scenario than the steady-state scenario, however, since the latest valuation 
of reported claims is higher now due to the case outstanding strengthening. 
 
Since there has been no change in the settlement of claims, the primary assumption of the 
development technique still holds true for paid claims. In times of changing case outstanding 
adequacy, actuaries often turn to the paid claim development method as an alternative to the 
reported claim development method. However, one common problem with the paid claim 
102

=== PDF PAGE 109 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
development method is the highly leveraged nature of the cumulative development factor for the 
most recent years in the experience period, particularly for long-tail lines of insurance. 
 
 
Scenario 4 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength 
 
We present the fourth scenario in the bottom section of Exhibit III, Sheet 11. The claim ratios are 
the same as those of the second scenario, and we assume changes in case outstanding strength 
that are similar to the third scenario. Once again, the paid claim development method produces 
the actual value for IBNR. The reported claim development method, while responsive to the 
increasing claim ratios, overstates the estimate of unpaid claims due to the changing case 
outstanding adequacy. The reported claim development technique produces a total unpaid claim 
estimate that is more than 20% greater than actual total unpaid claims and adds 22 points to the 
2008 calendar year claim ratio. 
 
 
Changes in Product Mix  
 
In this final example, we focus on the effect of changes in product mix on the development 
technique. In Chapter 6, we discuss the challenge for the actuary in finding homogeneous 
groupings of data while maintaining a sufficient volume of claims to be credible. In our final 
example of this chapter, we look at a portfolio of business in which we combine private passenger 
and commercial automobile insurance for the purpose of estimating unpaid claims. Typically, 
these categories of business have different underlying claim development patterns and ultimate 
claim ratios. We will see that the development technique is an acceptable method for determining 
estimates of unpaid claims for the combined portfolio as long as there are no changes in the mix 
of business (i.e., one line of business is not significantly increasing or decreasing in volume 
relative to the other line of business). However, if the business mix changes over the experience 
period, the results of the development technique may no longer be appropriate for the 
determination of the unpaid claim estimate.
51 
 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
For the changing product mix example, we review a steady-state environment that has no change 
in product mix (called U.S. Auto Steady-State) and an environment with a changing product mix 
(called U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix). 
 
We continue to use a ten-year experience period, accident years 1999 through 2008, for these two 
final examples. We assume that each of the private passenger and commercial automobile 
portfolios had $1 million in earned premiums for 1999. For U.S. Auto Steady-State, we assume 
that the earned premium for both private passenger and commercial automobile is increasing at an 
annual rate of 5%. For U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix, we assume that the portfolio includes 
the same private passenger premiums as the steady-state, but commercial automobile insurance 
premiums increase at 30% instead of 5% per year starting in 2005.  
                                                 
51 We construct this example for demonstration purposes only. Information regarding product mix is 
generally available so that the actuary would be able to make modifications to the methodology and/or the 
key assumptions for the purpose of estimating unpaid claims. Nevertheless, it is important to observe how a 
change in product mix can affect the results of the various methodologies for estimating unpaid claims 
presented in this and the following chapters. 
103

=== PDF PAGE 110 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
We assume that the ultimate claim ratio is 70% for private passenger automobile and 80% for 
commercial automobile. The following table summarizes reporting and payment patterns for the 
two categories of business. 
 
Table 7 – Key Assumptions – Product Mix Scenarios  
Reporting and Payment Patterns 
 Private Passenger Automobile   Commercial Automobile 
As of 
Month 
% 
Reported 
% 
Paid 
 % 
Reported 
% 
Paid 
12 77% 42% 59% 22% 
24 90% 71% 78% 46% 
36 95% 84% 89% 67% 
48 98% 92% 96% 82% 
60 99% 96% 98% 91% 
72 99% 98% 100% 95% 
84 100% 99% 100% 97% 
96 100% 99% 100% 98% 
108 100% 100% 100% 99% 
120 100% 100% 100% 100% 
 
We create the claim development triangles using the earned premium and ultimate claim ratios by 
accident year as well as the given reporting and payment patterns. Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 3 
present reported and paid claim development triangles assuming no change in product mix; the 
claim development triangles based on a changing product mix are in Exhibit IV, Sheets 4 and 5. 
Similar to our prior examples, we rely on the five-year volume-weighted averages to select age-
to-age factors. We calculate the actual IBNR in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1 for these two final examples. 
 
 
U.S. Auto Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix) 
 
For this scenario, both the reported and paid claim development techniques produce estimated 
IBNR that is equal to the actual IBNR. As long as the distribution between the different 
categories of business remains consistent (and there are no other operational or environmental 
changes), the claim development method should produce an accurate estimate of unpaid claims. 
The top section of Exhibit IV, Sheet 6 contains detailed calculations, similar to those presented 
earlier in this chapter. 
 
 
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix 
 
We present the calculations for the scenario with a change in product mix in the bottom section of 
Exhibit IV, Sheet 6. We note that there are no differences between the two examples until 
accident year 2005. This is the year in which commercial automobile insurance began to increase 
at a 30% annual rate instead of the historical 5% rate. We observe higher reported and paid claims 
for 2005 through 2008. For accident years 2006, 2007 and 2008, we also note higher cumulative 
claim development factors for both paid and reported claims. However, even with greater claims 
and higher claim development factors to ultimate, the development technique falls short of the 
actual IBNR.  
 
104

=== PDF PAGE 111 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 7 - Development Technique 
 
 
If we turn our attention to the claim development triangles in Exhibit IV, Sheets 4 and 5, we 
notice the critical issue confronting the actuary. What is the correct age-to-age factor when a 
portfolio is changing its composition? In our example, commercial automobile has a longer 
reporting pattern than private passenger automobile and thus requires the selection of higher age-
to-age factors. Since the proportion of commercial automobile claims is increasing in the 
portfolio, we see increasing age-to-age factors in our experience. Changing from a five-year 
volume-weighted average to a three-year volume-weighted average for selecting age-to-age 
factors would help move the estimated IBNR closer to the actual IBNR, but we would still fall 
short by a significant amount. 
 
In this situation, the reported claim development method is more responsive than the paid claim 
development method due to the shorter time frame in which claims are reported versus paid. 
However, both methods result in estimated IBNR that are significantly lower than the actual 
IBNR. This example illustrates how changes in the portfolio could result in serious distortions in 
the development technique. Within a single line of insurance, changes in the types of claims that 
are occurring could have a similar effect. 
 
 
105

=== PDF PAGE 112 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 1
Reported Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1998  37,017,487  43,169,009  45,568,919  46,784,558  47,337,318  47,533,264  47,634,419  47,689,655  47,724,678  47,742,304
1999  38,954,484  46,045,718  48,882,924  50,219,672  50,729,292  50,926,779  51,069,285  51,163,540  51,185,767
2000  41,155,776  49,371,478  52,358,476  53,780,322  54,303,086  54,582,950  54,742,188  54,837,929
2001  42,394,069  50,584,112  53,704,296  55,150,118  55,895,583  56,156,727  56,299,562
2002  44,755,243  52,971,643  56,102,312  57,703,851  58,363,564  58,592,712
2003  45,163,102  52,497,731  55,468,551  57,015,411  57,565,344
2004  45,417,309  52,640,322  55,553,673  56,976,657
2005  46,360,869  53,790,061  56,786,410
2006  46,582,684  54,641,339
2007  48,853,563
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.166 1.056 1.027 1.012 1.004 1.002 1.001 1.001 1.000
1999 1.182 1.062 1.027 1.010 1.004 1.003 1.002 1.000
2000 1.200 1.061 1.027 1.010 1.005 1.003 1.002
2001 1.193 1.062 1.027 1.014 1.005 1.003
2002 1.184 1.059 1.029 1.011 1.004
2003 1.162 1.057 1.028 1.010
2004 1.159 1.055 1.026
2005 1.160 1.056
2006 1.173
2007
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.168 1.058 1.027 1.011 1.004 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000
  Latest 3 1.164 1.056 1.027 1.012 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000
Medial Average*
  Latest 5x1 1.165 1.057 1.027 1.010 1.004 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.168 1.058 1.027 1.011 1.004 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000
  Latest 3 1.164 1.056 1.027 1.012 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000
Geometric Average
  Latest 4 1.164 1.057 1.027 1.011 1.004 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Prior Selected 1.160 1.057 1.028 1.012 1.005 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000
Selected 1.164 1.056 1.027 1.012 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.292 1.110 1.051 1.023 1.011 1.006 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 77.4% 90.1% 95.1% 97.8% 98.9% 99.4% 99.7% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0%
*In the examples, the medial average for two data points is the same as the simple average, and the medial average for one data point is simply the value of the data point.
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_1_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
106

=== PDF PAGE 113 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 2
Paid Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1998  18,539,254  33,231,039  40,062,008  43,892,039  45,896,535  46,765,422  47,221,322  47,446,877  47,555,456  47,644,187
1999  20,410,193  36,090,684  43,259,402  47,159,241  49,208,532  50,162,043  50,625,757  50,878,808  51,000,534
2000  22,120,843  38,976,014  46,389,282  50,562,385  52,735,280  53,740,101  54,284,334  54,533,225
2001  22,992,259  40,096,198  47,767,835  52,093,916  54,363,436  55,378,801  55,878,421
2002  24,092,782  41,795,313  49,903,803  54,352,884  56,754,376  57,807,215
2003  24,084,451  41,399,612  49,070,332  53,584,201  55,930,654
2004  24,369,770  41,489,863  49,236,678  53,774,672
2005  25,100,697  42,702,229  50,644,994
2006  25,608,776  43,606,497
2007  27,229,969
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.792 1.206 1.096 1.046 1.019 1.010 1.005 1.002 1.002
1999 1.768 1.199 1.090 1.043 1.019 1.009 1.005 1.002
2000 1.762 1.190 1.090 1.043 1.019 1.010 1.005
2001 1.744 1.191 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.009
2002 1.735 1.194 1.089 1.044 1.019
2003 1.719 1.185 1.092 1.044
2004 1.703 1.187 1.092
2005 1.701 1.186
2006 1.703
2007
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.712 1.189 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.010 1.005 1.002 1.002
  Latest 3 1.702 1.186 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.002
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.708 1.188 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.002
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.712 1.189 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.010 1.005 1.002 1.002
  Latest 3 1.702 1.186 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.002
Geometric Average
  Latest 4 1.706 1.188 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.010 1.005 1.002 1.002
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Prior Selected 1.707 1.189 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.010 1.005 1.003 1.001 1.002
Selected 1.702 1.186 1.091 1.044 1.019 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.002 1.002
CDF to Ultimate 2.390 1.404 1.184 1.085 1.040 1.020 1.011 1.006 1.004 1.002
Percent Paid 41.8% 71.2% 84.5% 92.2% 96.2% 98.0% 98.9% 99.4% 99.6% 99.8%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_1_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
107

=== PDF PAGE 114 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported and Paid Claims ($000)
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/07 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/07 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 120  47,742,304  47,644,187 1.000 1.002  47,742,304  47,739,475
1999 108  51,185,767  51,000,534 1.000 1.004  51,185,767  51,204,536
2000 96  54,837,929  54,533,225 1.001 1.006  54,892,767  54,860,424
2001 84  56,299,562  55,878,421 1.003 1.011  56,468,461  56,493,084
2002 72  58,592,712  57,807,215 1.006 1.020  58,944,268  58,963,359
2003 60  57,565,344  55,930,654 1.011 1.040  58,198,563  58,167,880
2004 48  56,976,657  53,774,672 1.023 1.085  58,287,120  58,345,519
2005 36  56,786,410  50,644,994 1.051 1.184  59,682,517  59,963,673
2006 24  54,641,339  43,606,497 1.110 1.404  60,651,886  61,223,522
2007 12  48,853,563  27,229,969 1.292 2.390  63,118,803  65,079,626
Total  543,481,587  498,050,368  569,172,456  572,041,099
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2007.
(3) and (4) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_1_3 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
108

=== PDF PAGE 115 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 4
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/07
Projected Ultimate Claims Case IBNR - Based on  Total - Based on
Accident Claims at 12/31/07 Using Dev. Method with Outstanding Dev. Method with  Dev. Method with
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid at 12/31/07 Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998  47,742,304  47,644,187  47,742,304  47,739,475  98,117 0 - 2,829  98,117  95,288
1999  51,185,767  51,000,534  51,185,767  51,204,536  185,233 0  18,769  185,233  204,002
2000  54,837,929  54,533,225  54,892,767  54,860,424  304,704  54,838  22,495  359,542  327,199
2001  56,299,562  55,878,421  56,468,461  56,493,084  421,141  168,899  193,522  590,040  614,663
2002  58,592,712  57,807,215  58,944,268  58,963,359  785,497  351,556  370,647  1,137,053  1,156,144
2003  57,565,344  55,930,654  58,198,563  58,167,880  1,634,690  633,219  602,536  2,267,909  2,237,226
2004  56,976,657  53,774,672  58,287,120  58,345,519  3,201,985  1,310,463  1,368,862  4,512,448  4,570,847
2005  56,786,410  50,644,994  59,682,517  59,963,673  6,141,416  2,896,107  3,177,263  9,037,523  9,318,679
2006  54,641,339  43,606,497  60,651,886  61,223,522  11,034,842  6,010,547  6,582,183  17,045,389  17,617,025
2007  48,853,563  27,229,969  63,118,803  65,079,626  21,623,594  14,265,240  16,226,063  35,888,834  37,849,657
Total  543,481,587  498,050,368  569,172,456  572,041,099  45,431,219  25,690,869  28,559,512  71,122,088  73,990,731
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(4) and (5) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 3.
(6) = [(2) - (3)].
(7) = [(4) - (2)].
(8) = [(5) - (2)].
(9) = [(6) + (7)].
(10) = [(6) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_1_4 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
109

=== PDF PAGE 116 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Reported Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  11,171  12,380  13,216  14,067  14,688  16,366  16,163  15,835  15,822
1999  13,255  16,405  19,639  22,473  23,764  25,094  24,795  25,071  25,107
2000  15,676  18,749  21,900  27,144  29,488  34,458  36,949  37,505  37,246
2001  11,827  16,004  21,022  26,578  34,205  37,136  38,541  38,798
2002  12,811  20,370  26,656  37,667  44,414  48,701  48,169
2003  9,651  16,995  30,354  40,594  44,231  44,373
2004  16,995  40,180  58,866  71,707  70,288
2005  28,674  47,432  70,340  70,655
2006  27,066  46,783  48,804
2007  19,477  31,732
2008  18,632
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.108 1.068 1.064 1.044 1.114 0.988 0.980 0.999
1999 1.238 1.197 1.144 1.057 1.056 0.988 1.011 1.001
2000 1.196 1.168 1.239 1.086 1.169 1.072 1.015 0.993
2001 1.353 1.314 1.264 1.287 1.086 1.038 1.007
2002 1.590 1.309 1.413 1.179 1.097 0.989
2003 1.761 1.786 1.337 1.090 1.003
2004 2.364 1.465 1.218 0.980
2005 1.654 1.483 1.004
2006 1.728 1.043
2007 1.629
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.827 1.417 1.247 1.124 1.082 1.040 1.031 0.997 0.991 0.999
  Latest 3 1.671 1.330 1.187 1.083 1.062 1.033 1.003 0.997 0.991 0.999
  Latest 2 1.679 1.263 1.111 1.035 1.050 1.013 1.011 1.002 0.991 0.999
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.715 1.419 1.273 1.118 1.080 1.046 1.011 0.993 0.991 0.999
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 4 1.802 1.376 1.185 1.094 1.081 1.033 1.019 0.998 0.993 0.999
  Latest 3 1.674 1.325 1.147 1.060 1.060 1.028 1.005 0.998 0.993 0.999
  Latest 2 1.687 1.265 1.102 1.020 1.050 1.010 1.011 1.000 0.993 0.999
Geometric Average
  Latest 3 1.670 1.314 1.178 1.080 1.061 1.033 1.003 0.997 0.991 0.999
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.687 1.265 1.102 1.020 1.050 1.010 1.011 1.000 0.993 0.999 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.551 1.512 1.196 1.085 1.064 1.013 1.003 0.992 0.992 0.999 1.000
Percent Reported 39.2% 66.1% 83.6% 92.2% 94.0% 98.7% 99.7% 100.8% 100.8% 100.1% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_2_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
110

=== PDF PAGE 117 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Paid Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  6,309  8,521  10,082  11,620  13,242  14,419  15,311  15,764  15,822
1999  4,666  9,861  13,971  18,127  22,032  23,511  24,146  24,592  24,817
2000  1,302  6,513  12,139  17,828  24,030  28,853  33,222  35,902  36,782
2001  1,539  5,952  12,319  18,609  24,387  31,090  37,070  38,519
2002  2,318  7,932  13,822  22,095  31,945  40,629  44,437
2003  1,743  6,240  12,683  22,892  34,505  39,320
2004  2,221  9,898  25,950  43,439  52,811
2005  3,043  12,219  27,073  40,026
2006  3,531  11,778  22,819
2007  3,529  11,865
2008  3,409
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.351 1.183 1.152 1.140 1.089 1.062 1.030 1.004
1999 2.114 1.417 1.297 1.215 1.067 1.027 1.018 1.009
2000 5.000 1.864 1.469 1.348 1.201 1.151 1.081 1.024
2001 3.867 2.070 1.511 1.311 1.275 1.192 1.039
2002 3.422 1.743 1.599 1.446 1.272 1.094
2003 3.580 2.032 1.805 1.507 1.140
2004 4.456 2.622 1.674 1.216
2005 4.015 2.216 1.478
2006 3.336 1.937
2007 3.362
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 3.750 2.110 1.613 1.365 1.220 1.129 1.059 1.035 1.019 1.004
  Latest 3 3.571 2.258 1.652 1.390 1.229 1.146 1.049 1.035 1.019 1.004
  Latest 2 3.349 2.077 1.576 1.362 1.206 1.143 1.060 1.021 1.019 1.004
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 3.652 2.062 1.594 1.368 1.229 1.128 1.060 1.024 1.019 1.004
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 4 3.713 2.206 1.615 1.342 1.218 1.128 1.056 1.030 1.017 1.004
  Latest 3 3.550 2.238 1.619 1.349 1.222 1.141 1.051 1.030 1.017 1.004
  Latest 2 3.349 2.079 1.574 1.316 1.203 1.136 1.059 1.022 1.017 1.004
Geometric Average
  Latest 3 3.558 2.241 1.647 1.384 1.227 1.145 1.049 1.035 1.019 1.004
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 3.349 2.079 1.574 1.316 1.203 1.136 1.059 1.022 1.017 1.004 1.010
CDF to Ultimate 21.999 6.569 3.160 2.007 1.525 1.268 1.116 1.054 1.031 1.014 1.010
Percent Paid 4.5% 15.2% 31.6% 49.8% 65.6% 78.9% 89.6% 94.9% 97.0% 98.6% 99.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_2_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
111

=== PDF PAGE 118 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported and Paid Claims ($000)
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 132  15,822  15,822 1.000 1.010  15,822  15,980
1999 120  25,107  24,817 0.999 1.014  25,082  25,164
2000 108  37,246  36,782 0.992 1.031  36,948  37,922
2001 96  38,798  38,519 0.992 1.054  38,487  40,600
2002 84  48,169  44,437 1.003 1.116  48,313  49,592
2003 72  44,373  39,320 1.013 1.268  44,950  49,858
2004 60  70,288  52,811 1.064 1.525  74,787  80,537
2005 48  70,655  40,026 1.085 2.007  76,661  80,333
2006 36  48,804  22,819 1.196 3.160  58,370  72,108
2007 24  31,732  11,865 1.512 6.569  47,979  77,941
2008 12  18,632  3,409 2.551 21.999  47,530  74,995
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit II, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_2_3 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
112

=== PDF PAGE 119 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/08
Projected Ultimate Claims Case IBNR - Based on  Total - Based on
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Using Dev. Method with Outstanding Dev. Method with  Dev. Method with
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980 0 0  158 0  158
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  290 - 25  58  265  347
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  465 - 298  676  167  1,140
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  278 - 310  1,802 - 32  2,080
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  3,731  145  1,423  3,876  5,155
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  5,052  577  5,485  5,629  10,538
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  17,477  4,498  10,249  21,976  27,726
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  30,629  6,006  9,678  36,634  40,307
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  25,985  9,566  23,304  35,551  49,289
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  19,867  16,247  46,209  36,114  66,076
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  15,223  28,898  56,363  44,121  71,586
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  118,997  65,303  155,405  184,300  274,402
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) = [(2) - (3)].
(7) = [(4) - (2)].
(8) = [(5) - (2)].
(9) = [(6) + (7)].
(10) = [(6) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_2_4 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
113

=== PDF PAGE 120 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 1
Summary of Earned Premium and Claim Ratio Assumptions and Actual IBNR
Reported Reported
Accident Earned Ultimate Ultimate Claims at Actual Ultimate Ultimate Claims at Actual
Year Premium Claim Ratio Claims 12/31/08 IBNR Claim Ratio Claims 12/31/08 IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Steady-State Increasing Claim Ratios
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000  700,000 0 70.0%  700,000  700,000 0
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000  735,000 0 70.0%  735,000  735,000 0
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750  771,750 0 70.0%  771,750  771,750 0
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338  810,338 0 70.0%  810,338  810,338 0
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397  884,463  8,934 80.0%  1,021,025  1,010,815  10,210
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067  919,306  18,761 85.0%  1,139,081  1,116,300  22,782
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970  935,722  49,249 90.0%  1,266,390  1,203,071  63,320
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219  930,797  103,422 95.0%  1,403,583  1,263,224  140,358
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930  836,166  249,764 100.0%  1,551,328  1,194,523  356,805
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  8,365,887  438,638  10,249,350  9,647,366  601,984
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000  700,000 0 70.0%  700,000  700,000 0
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000  735,000 0 70.0%  735,000  735,000 0
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750  771,750 0 70.0%  771,750  771,750 0
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338  810,338 0 70.0%  810,338  810,338 0
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397  884,463  8,934 80.0%  1,021,025  1,010,815  10,210
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067  933,377  4,690 85.0%  1,139,081  1,133,386  5,695
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970  962,808  22,162 90.0%  1,266,390  1,237,897  28,494
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219  979,922  54,296 95.0%  1,403,583  1,329,895  73,688
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930  931,185  154,745 100.0%  1,551,328  1,330,264  221,064
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  8,551,189  253,336  10,249,350  9,901,689  347,660
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) and (7) Ultimate claim ratios assumed to be known for purpose of example.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Latest diagonal of reported claim triangles in Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 6.
(6) = [(4) - (5)].
(8) = [(2) x (7)].
(9) Latest diagonal of reported claim triangles in Exhibit III, Sheets 4 and 8.
(10) = [(8) - (9)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
114

=== PDF PAGE 121 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 2
U.S. PP Auto Steady-State - Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  539,000  630,000  665,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000
2000  565,950  661,500  698,250  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000  735,000  735,000
2001  594,248  694,575  733,163  756,315  764,033  764,033  771,750  771,750
2002  623,960  729,304  769,821  794,131  802,234  802,234  810,338
2003  655,158  765,769  808,312  833,837  842,346  842,346
2004  687,916  804,057  848,727  875,529  884,463
2005  722,312  844,260  891,164  919,306
2006  758,427  886,473  935,722
2007  796,348  930,797
2008  836,166
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
2001 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2002 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010
2003 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000
2004 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010
2005 1.169 1.056 1.032
2006 1.169 1.056
2007 1.169
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.299 1.111 1.053 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 77.0% 90.0% 95.0% 98.0% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
115

=== PDF PAGE 122 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 3
U.S. PP Auto Steady-State - Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  294,000  497,000  588,000  644,000  672,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000
2000  308,700  521,850  617,400  676,200  705,600  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000
2001  324,135  547,943  648,270  710,010  740,880  756,315  764,033  764,033
2002  340,342  575,340  680,684  745,511  777,924  794,131  802,234
2003  357,359  604,107  714,718  782,786  816,820  833,837
2004  375,227  634,312  750,454  821,925  857,661
2005  393,988  666,028  787,976  863,022
2006  413,688  699,329  827,375
2007  434,372  734,295
2008  456,090
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2000 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010
2001 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000
2002 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010
2003 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021
2004 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043
2005 1.690 1.183 1.095
2006 1.690 1.183
2007 1.690
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.381 1.408 1.190 1.087 1.042 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000
Percent Paid 42.0% 71.0% 84.0% 92.0% 96.0% 98.0% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_3 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
116

=== PDF PAGE 123 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 4
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios - Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  539,000  630,000  665,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000
2000  565,950  661,500  698,250  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000  735,000  735,000
2001  594,248  694,575  733,163  756,315  764,033  764,033  771,750  771,750
2002  623,960  729,304  769,821  794,131  802,234  802,234  810,338
2003  655,158  765,769  808,312  833,837  842,346  842,346
2004  786,189  918,923  969,974  1,000,605  1,010,815
2005  877,093  1,025,173  1,082,127  1,116,300
2006  975,121  1,139,751  1,203,071
2007  1,080,759  1,263,224
2008  1,194,523
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
2001 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2002 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010
2003 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000
2004 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010
2005 1.169 1.056 1.032
2006 1.169 1.056
2007 1.169
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.299 1.111 1.053 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 77.0% 90.0% 95.0% 98.0% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_4 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
117

=== PDF PAGE 124 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 5
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios - Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  294,000  497,000  588,000  644,000  672,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000
2000  308,700  521,850  617,400  676,200  705,600  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000
2001  324,135  547,943  648,270  710,010  740,880  756,315  764,033  764,033
2002  340,342  575,340  680,684  745,511  777,924  794,131  802,234
2003  357,359  604,107  714,718  782,786  816,820  833,837
2004  428,831  724,928  857,661  939,343  980,184
2005  478,414  808,748  956,828  1,047,955
2006  531,884  899,137  1,063,768
2007  589,505  996,544
2008  651,558
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2000 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010
2001 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000
2002 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010
2003 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021
2004 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043
2005 1.690 1.183 1.095
2006 1.690 1.183
2007 1.690
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.381 1.408 1.190 1.087 1.042 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000
Percent Paid 42.0% 71.0% 84.0% 92.0% 96.0% 98.0% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_5 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
118

=== PDF PAGE 125 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 6
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength - Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  539,000  630,000  665,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000
2000  565,950  661,500  698,250  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000  735,000  735,000
2001  594,248  694,575  733,163  756,315  764,033  764,033  771,750  771,750
2002  623,960  729,304  769,821  794,131  802,234  802,234  810,338
2003  655,158  765,769  808,312  833,837  842,346  842,346
2004  687,916  804,057  848,727  878,745  884,463
2005  722,312  844,260  897,355  933,377
2006  758,427  897,702  962,808
2007  818,067  979,922
2008  931,185
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
2001 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2002 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010
2003 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000
2004 1.169 1.056 1.035 1.007
2005 1.169 1.063 1.040
2006 1.184 1.073
2007 1.198
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.178 1.061 1.034 1.009 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.178 1.061 1.034 1.009 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.318 1.119 1.055 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 75.9% 89.4% 94.8% 98.1% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_6 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
119

=== PDF PAGE 126 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 7
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength - Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  294,000  497,000  588,000  644,000  672,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000
2000  308,700  521,850  617,400  676,200  705,600  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000
2001  324,135  547,943  648,270  710,010  740,880  756,315  764,033  764,033
2002  340,342  575,340  680,684  745,511  777,924  794,131  802,234
2003  357,359  604,107  714,718  782,786  816,820  833,837
2004  375,227  634,312  750,454  821,925  857,661
2005  393,988  666,028  787,976  863,022
2006  413,688  699,329  827,375
2007  434,372  734,295
2008  456,090
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2000 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010
2001 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000
2002 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010
2003 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021
2004 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043
2005 1.690 1.183 1.095
2006 1.690 1.183
2007 1.690
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.381 1.408 1.190 1.087 1.042 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000
Percent Paid 42.0% 71.0% 84.0% 92.0% 96.0% 98.0% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_7 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
120

=== PDF PAGE 127 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 8
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength - Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  539,000  630,000  665,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000
2000  565,950  661,500  698,250  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000  735,000  735,000
2001  594,248  694,575  733,163  756,315  764,033  764,033  771,750  771,750
2002  623,960  729,304  769,821  794,131  802,234  802,234  810,338
2003  655,158  765,769  808,312  833,837  842,346  842,346
2004  786,189  918,923  969,974  1,004,280  1,010,815
2005  877,093  1,025,173  1,089,645  1,133,386
2006  975,121  1,154,188  1,237,897
2007  1,110,234  1,329,895
2008  1,330,264
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
2001 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2002 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000 1.010
2003 1.169 1.056 1.032 1.010 1.000
2004 1.169 1.056 1.035 1.007
2005 1.169 1.063 1.040
2006 1.184 1.073
2007 1.198
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.179 1.061 1.035 1.009 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.179 1.061 1.035 1.009 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.320 1.120 1.055 1.019 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 75.7% 89.3% 94.8% 98.1% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_8 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
121

=== PDF PAGE 128 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 9
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength - Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  294,000  497,000  588,000  644,000  672,000  686,000  693,000  693,000  700,000  700,000
2000  308,700  521,850  617,400  676,200  705,600  720,300  727,650  727,650  735,000
2001  324,135  547,943  648,270  710,010  740,880  756,315  764,033  764,033
2002  340,342  575,340  680,684  745,511  777,924  794,131  802,234
2003  357,359  604,107  714,718  782,786  816,820  833,837
2004  428,831  724,928  857,661  939,343  980,184
2005  478,414  808,748  956,828  1,047,955
2006  531,884  899,137  1,063,768
2007  589,505  996,544
2008  651,558
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
2000 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010
2001 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000
2002 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010
2003 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021
2004 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043
2005 1.690 1.183 1.095
2006 1.690 1.183
2007 1.690
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.690 1.183 1.095 1.043 1.021 1.010 1.000 1.010 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.381 1.408 1.190 1.087 1.042 1.020 1.010 1.010 1.000 1.000
Percent Paid 42.0% 71.0% 84.0% 92.0% 96.0% 98.0% 99.0% 99.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_9 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
122

=== PDF PAGE 129 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 10
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Difference from Actual IBN R
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/08 Case CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Using Dev. Method with Actual Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Outstanding Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
Steady-State
1999 120  700,000  700,000 0 1.000 1.000  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000 0 1.000 1.000  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  764,033  7,718 1.000 1.010  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  802,234  8,103 1.000 1.010  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  842,346  833,837  8,509 1.010 1.020  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  884,463  857,661  26,802 1.010 1.042  893,397  893,397  8,934  8,934  8,934 0 0
2005 48  919,306  863,022  56,284 1.020 1.087  938,067  938,067  18,761  18,761  18,761 0 0
2006 36  935,722  827,375  108,347 1.053 1.190  984,970  984,970  49,249  49,249  49,249 0 0
2007 24  930,797  734,295  196,502 1.111 1.408  1,034,219  1,034,219  103,422  103,422  103,422 0 0
2008 12  836,166  456,090  380,075 1.299 2.381  1,085,930  1,085,930  249,764  249,764  249,764 0 0
Total  8,365,887  7,573,548  792,339  8,804,525  8,804,525  438,638  438,638  438,638 0 0
Increasing Claim Ratios
1999 120  700,000  700,000 0 1.000 1.000  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000 0 1.000 1.000  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  764,033  7,718 1.000 1.010  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  802,234  8,103 1.000 1.010  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  842,346  833,837  8,509 1.010 1.020  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,010,815  980,184  30,631 1.010 1.042  1,021,025  1,021,025  10,210  10,210  10,210 0 0
2005 48  1,116,300  1,047,955  68,345 1.020 1.087  1,139,081  1,139,081  22,782  22,782  22,782 0 0
2006 36  1,203,071  1,063,768  139,303 1.053 1.190  1,266,390  1,266,390  63,320  63,320  63,320 0 0
2007 24  1,263,224  996,544  266,681 1.111 1.408  1,403,583  1,403,583  140,358  140,358  140,358 0 0
2008 12  1,194,523  651,558  542,965 1.299 2.381  1,551,328  1,551,328  356,805  356,805  356,805 0 0
Total  9,647,366  8,575,112  1,072,254  10,249,350  10,249,350  601,984  601,984  601,984 0 0
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 5.
(5) = [(3) - (4)].
(6) and (7) CDF based on 5-year volume-weighted average age-to-age factors presented in Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 5.
(8) = [(3) x (6)].
(9) = [(4) x (7)].
(10) = [(8) - (3)].
(11) = [(9) - (3)].
(12) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(13) = [(12) - (10)].
(14) = [(12) - (11)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_10 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
123

=== PDF PAGE 130 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 11
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Difference from Actual IBN R
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/08 Case CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Using Dev. Method with Actual Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Outstanding Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
1999 120  700,000  700,000 0 1.000 1.000  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000 0 1.000 1.000  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  764,033  7,718 1.000 1.010  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  802,234  8,103 1.000 1.010  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  842,346  833,837  8,509 1.010 1.020  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  884,463  857,661  26,802 1.010 1.042  893,397  893,397  8,934  8,934  8,934 0 0
2005 48  933,377  863,022  70,355 1.020 1.087  951,656  938,067  18,279  4,690  4,690 - 13,589 0
2006 36  962,808  827,375  135,433 1.055 1.190  1,015,302  984,970  52,493  22,162  22,162 - 30,331 0
2007 24  979,922  734,295  245,627 1.119 1.408  1,096,235  1,034,219  116,313  54,296  54,296 - 62,017 0
2008 12  931,185  456,090  475,094 1.318 2.381  1,227,589  1,085,930  296,404  154,745  154,745 - 141,659 0
Total  8,551,189  7,573,548  977,641  9,052,121  8,804,525  500,932  253,336  253,336 - 247,596 0
Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999 120  700,000  700,000 0 1.000 1.000  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000 0 1.000 1.000  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  764,033  7,718 1.000 1.010  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  802,234  8,103 1.000 1.010  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  842,346  833,837  8,509 1.010 1.020  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,010,815  980,184  30,631 1.010 1.042  1,021,025  1,021,025  10,210  10,210  10,210 0 0
2005 48  1,133,386  1,047,955  85,431 1.019 1.087  1,155,482  1,139,081  22,096  5,695  5,695 - 16,400 0
2006 36  1,237,897  1,063,768  174,129 1.055 1.190  1,305,639  1,266,390  67,742  28,494  28,494 - 39,248 0
2007 24  1,329,895  996,544  333,351 1.120 1.408  1,488,874  1,403,583  158,980  73,688  73,688 - 85,292 0
2008 12  1,330,264  651,558  678,706 1.320 2.381  1,756,504  1,551,328  426,240  221,064  221,064 - 205,176 0
Total  9,901,689  8,575,112  1,326,577  10,595,466  10,249,350  693,777  347,660  347,660 - 346,116 0
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Exhibit III, Sheets 6 through 9.
(5) = [(3) - (4)].
(6) and (7) CDF based on 5-year volume-weighted average age-to-age factors presented in Exhibit III, Sheets 6 through 9.
(8) = [(3) x (6)].
(9) = [(4) x (7)].
(10) = [(8) - (3)].
(11) = [(9) - (3)].
(12) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(13) = [(12) - (10)].
(14) = [(12) - (11)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_3_11 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
124

=== PDF PAGE 131 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 1
Summary of Assumptions - Earned Premiums and Claim Ratios
Earned Premium Ultimate Claim Ratios Ultimate Claims Reported
Accident Priv Pass Comm Total Priv Pass Comm Total Priv Pass Comm Total Claims Actual
Year Auto Auto Auto Auto Auto Auto Auto Auto Auto at 12/31/08 IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999  1,000,000  1,000,000  2,000,000 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  700,000  800,000  1,500,000  1,500,000 0
2000  1,050,000  1,050,000  2,100,000 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  735,000  840,000  1,575,000  1,575,000 0
2001  1,102,500  1,102,500  2,205,000 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  771,750  882,000  1,653,750  1,653,750 0
2002  1,157,625  1,157,625  2,315,250 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  810,338  926,100  1,736,438  1,736,438 0
2003  1,215,506  1,215,506  2,431,013 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  850,854  972,405  1,823,259  1,814,751  8,509
2004  1,276,282  1,276,282  2,552,563 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  893,397  1,021,025  1,914,422  1,885,068  29,354
2005  1,340,096  1,340,096  2,680,191 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  938,067  1,072,077  2,010,143  1,948,499  61,644
2006  1,407,100  1,407,100  2,814,201 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  984,970  1,125,680  2,110,651  1,937,577  173,073
2007  1,477,455  1,477,455  2,954,911 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  1,034,219  1,181,964  2,216,183  1,852,729  363,454
2008  1,551,328  1,551,328  3,102,656 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  1,085,930  1,241,063  2,326,992  1,568,393  758,599
Total  12,577,893  12,577,893  25,155,785  8,804,525  10,062,314  18,866,839  17,472,204  1,394,634
Changing Product Mix
1999  1,000,000  1,000,000  2,000,000 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  700,000  800,000  1,500,000  1,500,000 0
2000  1,050,000  1,050,000  2,100,000 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  735,000  840,000  1,575,000  1,575,000 0
2001  1,102,500  1,102,500  2,205,000 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  771,750  882,000  1,653,750  1,653,750 0
2002  1,157,625  1,157,625  2,315,250 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  810,338  926,100  1,736,438  1,736,438 0
2003  1,215,506  1,215,506  2,431,013 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  850,854  972,405  1,823,259  1,814,751  8,509
2004  1,276,282  1,276,282  2,552,563 70.0% 80.0% 75.0%  893,397  1,021,025  1,914,422  1,885,068  29,354
2005  1,340,096  1,659,166  2,999,262 70.0% 80.0% 75.5%  938,067  1,327,333  2,265,400  2,193,545  71,855
2006  1,407,100  2,156,916  3,564,016 70.0% 80.0% 76.1%  984,970  1,725,533  2,710,503  2,471,446  239,057
2007  1,477,455  2,803,991  4,281,446 70.0% 80.0% 76.5%  1,034,219  2,243,192  3,277,411  2,680,487  596,924
2008  1,551,328  3,645,188  5,196,516 70.0% 80.0% 77.0%  1,085,930  2,916,150  4,002,080  2,556,695  1,445,385
Total  12,577,893  17,067,173  29,645,066  8,804,525  13,653,738  22,458,263  20,067,179  2,391,084
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase.
(3) For no change scenario, assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter. For change scenario, assume
     annual increase of 30% beginning in 2005.
(4) = [(2) + (3)].
(5) and (6) Ultimate claim ratios assumed to be known for purpose of example.
(7) = [(10) / (4)].
(8) = [(2) x (5)].
(9) = [(3) x (6)].
(10) = [(8) + (9)].
(11) Latest diagonal of reported claim triangles in Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 4.
(12) = [(10) - (11)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_4_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
125

=== PDF PAGE 132 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 2
U.S. Auto Steady-State - Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  1,011,000  1,254,000  1,377,000  1,454,000  1,477,000  1,493,000  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000
2000  1,061,550  1,316,700  1,445,850  1,526,700  1,550,850  1,567,650  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,575,000
2001  1,114,628  1,382,535  1,518,143  1,603,035  1,628,393  1,646,033  1,653,750  1,653,750
2002  1,170,359  1,451,662  1,594,050  1,683,187  1,709,812  1,728,334  1,736,438
2003  1,228,877  1,524,245  1,673,752  1,767,346  1,795,303  1,814,751
2004  1,290,321  1,600,457  1,757,440  1,855,713  1,885,068
2005  1,354,837  1,680,480  1,845,312  1,948,499
2006  1,422,579  1,764,504  1,937,577
2007  1,493,707  1,852,729
2008  1,568,393
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000
2001 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000
2002 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005
2003 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011
2004 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016
2005 1.240 1.098 1.056
2006 1.240 1.098
2007 1.240
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.484 1.196 1.089 1.032 1.016 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 67.4% 83.6% 91.8% 96.9% 98.5% 99.5% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_4_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
126

=== PDF PAGE 133 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 3
U.S. Auto Steady-State - Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  470,000  865,000  1,124,000  1,300,000  1,400,000  1,446,000  1,469,000  1,477,000  1,492,000  1,500,000
2000  493,500  908,250  1,180,200  1,365,000  1,470,000  1,518,300  1,542,450  1,550,850  1,566,600
2001  518,175  953,663  1,239,210  1,433,250  1,543,500  1,594,215  1,619,573  1,628,393
2002  544,084  1,001,346  1,301,171  1,504,913  1,620,675  1,673,926  1,700,551
2003  571,288  1,051,413  1,366,229  1,580,158  1,701,709  1,757,622
2004  599,852  1,103,984  1,434,540  1,659,166  1,786,794
2005  629,845  1,159,183  1,506,268  1,742,124
2006  661,337  1,217,142  1,581,581
2007  694,404  1,277,999
2008  729,124
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010 1.005
2000 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010
2001 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005
2002 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016
2003 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033
2004 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077
2005 1.840 1.299 1.157
2006 1.840 1.299
2007 1.840
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010 1.005
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010 1.005 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 3.191 1.734 1.335 1.154 1.071 1.037 1.021 1.016 1.005 1.000
Percent Paid 31.3% 57.7% 74.9% 86.7% 93.3% 96.4% 97.9% 98.5% 99.5% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_4_3 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
127

=== PDF PAGE 134 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 4
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix - Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  1,011,000  1,254,000  1,377,000  1,454,000  1,477,000  1,493,000  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000
2000  1,061,550  1,316,700  1,445,850  1,526,700  1,550,850  1,567,650  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,575,000
2001  1,114,628  1,382,535  1,518,143  1,603,035  1,628,393  1,646,033  1,653,750  1,653,750
2002  1,170,359  1,451,662  1,594,050  1,683,187  1,709,812  1,728,334  1,736,438
2003  1,228,877  1,524,245  1,673,752  1,767,346  1,795,303  1,814,751
2004  1,290,321  1,600,457  1,757,440  1,855,713  1,885,068
2005  1,505,438  1,879,580  2,072,490  2,193,545
2006  1,776,491  2,232,389  2,471,446
2007  2,119,832  2,680,487
2008  2,556,695
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000
2001 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000
2002 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011 1.005
2003 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016 1.011
2004 1.240 1.098 1.056 1.016
2005 1.249 1.103 1.058
2006 1.257 1.107
2007 1.264
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.252 1.101 1.057 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.252 1.101 1.057 1.016 1.011 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.503 1.200 1.090 1.032 1.016 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 66.5% 83.3% 91.7% 96.9% 98.5% 99.5% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_4_4 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
128

=== PDF PAGE 135 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 5
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix - Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120
1999  470,000  865,000  1,124,000  1,300,000  1,400,000  1,446,000  1,469,000  1,477,000  1,492,000  1,500,000
2000  493,500  908,250  1,180,200  1,365,000  1,470,000  1,518,300  1,542,450  1,550,850  1,566,600
2001  518,175  953,663  1,239,210  1,433,250  1,543,500  1,594,215  1,619,573  1,628,393
2002  544,084  1,001,346  1,301,171  1,504,913  1,620,675  1,673,926  1,700,551
2003  571,288  1,051,413  1,366,229  1,580,158  1,701,709  1,757,622
2004  599,852  1,103,984  1,434,540  1,659,166  1,786,794
2005  686,001  1,276,601  1,677,289  1,951,435
2006  793,305  1,493,074  1,983,482
2007  927,874  1,766,164
2008  1,097,644
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
1999 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010 1.005
2000 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010
2001 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005
2002 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033 1.016
2003 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077 1.033
2004 1.840 1.299 1.157 1.077
2005 1.861 1.314 1.163
2006 1.882 1.328
2007 1.903
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.870 1.310 1.158 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010 1.005
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 To Ult
Selected 1.870 1.310 1.158 1.077 1.033 1.016 1.005 1.010 1.005 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 3.273 1.750 1.336 1.154 1.071 1.037 1.021 1.016 1.005 1.000
Percent Paid 30.6% 57.1% 74.8% 86.7% 93.3% 96.4% 97.9% 98.5% 99.5% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_4_5 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
129

=== PDF PAGE 136 ===
Chapter 7 - Development Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 6
U.S. Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Difference from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/08 Case CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Using Dev. Method with Actual Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Outstanding Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999 120  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 1.000 1.000  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  1,575,000  1,566,600  8,400 1.000 1.005  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  1,653,750  1,628,393  25,358 1.000 1.016  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  1,736,438  1,700,551  35,886 1.000 1.021  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  1,814,751  1,757,622  57,129 1.005 1.037  1,823,259  1,823,259  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,885,068  1,786,794  98,274 1.016 1.071  1,914,422  1,914,422  29,354  29,354  29,354 0 0
2005 48  1,948,499  1,742,124  206,375 1.032 1.154  2,010,143  2,010,143  61,644  61,644  61,644 0 0
2006 36  1,937,577  1,581,581  355,996 1.089 1.335  2,110,651  2,110,651  173,073  173,073  173,073 0 0
2007 24  1,852,729  1,277,999  574,730 1.196 1.734  2,216,183  2,216,183  363,454  363,454  363,454 0 0
2008 12  1,568,393  729,124  839,269 1.484 3.191  2,326,992  2,326,992  758,599  758,599  758,599 0 0
Total  17,472,204  15,270,788  2,201,416  18,866,839  18,866,839  1,394,634  1,394,634  1,394,634 0 0
Changing Product Mix
1999 120  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 1.000 1.000  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  1,575,000  1,566,600  8,400 1.000 1.005  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  1,653,750  1,628,393  25,358 1.000 1.016  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  1,736,438  1,700,551  35,886 1.000 1.021  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  1,814,751  1,757,622  57,129 1.005 1.037  1,823,259  1,823,259  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,885,068  1,786,794  98,274 1.016 1.071  1,914,422  1,914,422  29,354  29,354  29,354 0 0
2005 48  2,193,545  1,951,435  242,111 1.032 1.154  2,262,942  2,251,655  69,397  58,110  71,855  2,458  13,745
2006 36  2,471,446  1,983,482  487,964 1.090 1.336  2,693,735  2,650,749  222,289  179,303  239,057  16,768  59,754
2007 24  2,680,487  1,766,164  914,323 1.200 1.750  3,217,775  3,091,666  537,288  411,179  596,924  59,636  185,746
2008 12  2,556,695  1,097,644  1,459,051 1.503 3.273  3,842,645  3,592,939  1,285,950  1,036,245  1,445,385  159,435  409,141
Total  20,067,179  16,738,684  3,328,495  22,219,966  21,789,878  2,152,787  1,722,699  2,391,084  238,297  668,386
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 through 5.
(5) = [(3) - (4)].
(6) and (7) CDF based on 5-year volume-weighted average age-to-age factors presented in Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 through 5.
(8) = [(3) x (6)].
(9) = [(4) x (7)].
(10) = [(8) - (3)].
(11) = [(9) - (3)].
(12) Developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(13) = [(12) - (10)].
(14) = [(12) - (11)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 7_4_6 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
130

=== PDF PAGE 137 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
CHAPTER 8 – EXPECTED CLAIMS TECHNIQUE 
 
 
Insurers frequently use the expected claims
52 method when entering new lines of business or new 
territories. Many actuaries also use this method for estimating unpaid claims for the most 
immature period(s). Expected claims are a critical component of several other methods including 
the Bornhuetter-Ferguson and Cape Cod techniques, which we discuss in Chapters 9 and 10.  
 
 
Key Assumption 
 
The key assumption of the expected claims technique is that the actuary can better estimate total 
unpaid claims based on an a priori (or initial) estimate than from claims experience observed to 
date. In certain circumstances, the claims experience reported to date may provide little 
information about ultimate claims, especially when compared to the a priori estimate. 
 
 
Common Uses of the Expected Claims Method  
 
Actuaries can use the expected claims method with all lines of insurance. However, this method 
is more commonly used in lines of business with longer emergence patterns and settlement 
patterns. The method can be used with data organized by accident year, report year, policy year, 
underwriting year, and even with calendar year data. The expected claims method is often used 
when: 
 
 An insurer enters a new line of business or a new territory 
 
 Operational or environmental changes make recent historical data irrelevant for projecting 
future claims activity for that cohort of claims 
 
 The claim development method is not appropriate for less mature periods since the 
development factors to ultimate are too highly leveraged 
 
 Data is unavailable for other methods 
 
 
Mechanics of the Expected Claims Technique 
 
There are numerous ways for actuaries to determine the a priori expected claims. Some of the 
approaches are mathematically simple and some involve complex statistical modeling. The 
approach most often used by commercial insurers is relatively simple. Actuaries for commercial 
insurers frequently apply a claim ratio method, where ultimate claims for an experience period 
are equal to a selected expected claim ratio multiplied by the earned premium. Such an approach 
implicitly relies on the accuracy of policy pricing and underwriting. An example of the other end 
                                                 
52 We again remind the reader that we specifically chose the term claims instead of losses. Many actuaries 
refer to the method described in this chapter as the expected loss method. These actuaries would use the 
terms expected loss ratios and expected losses instead of the terms expected claim ratios and expected 
claims that we selected to use. A critical point for the actuary to remember is that he or she must 
completely understand the terminology used in any situation. 
131

=== PDF PAGE 138 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
of the spectrum would be a complex simulation model built to project expected claims for a 
captive insurer covering the errors and omission liability for potential blood-related diseases. The 
selection of variables for input to this model may require the opinions of an expert panel of 
doctors, lawyers, and other practitioners from around the world. The complex stochastic model 
may also require detailed analyses of the frequency rate of claims and the likely cost of each 
claim if it were to occur. 
 
In this chapter, we focus only on exposure-based methods for determining expected claims. For 
further information, we refer students to the CAS Research Working Party on Bornhuetter-
Ferguson Initial Expected Losses. The goal of this working party is to produce a paper addressing 
the topic of expected losses (i.e., expected claims). 
 
In many respects, an exposure-based method of determining expected claims consists of very 
basic calculations. Actuaries calculate expected claims by multiplying a predetermined exposure 
base by a selected measure of claims per unit of exposure (known as the pure premium or the loss 
rate). The unpaid claim estimate is simply the projected expected claims less paid claims.  
 
The two challenges of the expected claims method are to determine the appropriate exposure base 
and to estimate the measurement of claims relative to that exposure base. 
 
For commercial insurers (and reinsurers), the most common exposure base is earned premium and 
the most common measurement of claims is the claim ratio. Expected claims are then equal to the 
product of the earned premium and the expected claim ratio.  
 
Self-insured organizations do not generally collect premiums in the same way that an insurer 
does. As a result, actuaries working with self-insurers generally use other exposure bases that 
they believe are closely related to the risk and thus the potential for claims and are readily 
observable and available. The following table provides examples, by line of insurance, of the 
types of exposures that actuaries often use for the analysis of self-insurers’ unpaid claims. 
 
Line of Insurance Exposure 
U.S. workers compensation Payroll 
Automobile liability Number of vehicles or miles driven 
General liability for public entities Population or operating expenditures 
General liability for corporations Sales or square footage 
Hospital professional liability Average occupied beds and outpatient visits 
Property Property values 
Crime Number of employees 
 
For self-insurers, the expected claims are equal to the product of the exposure and a pure 
premium per unit of exposure. 
 
As noted above, one of the challenges for actuaries working with either insurers (and reinsurers) 
or self-insurers is to determine the claim ratio or pure premium, respectively. Actuaries often 
begin with a review of the historical claims and exposure experience. We present two examples 
of the expected claims method in Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2. In these two examples, we use the 
expected claims method to estimate unpaid claims for accident year 2008 only. We use historical 
reported and paid claims data as well as exposure data from each organization for our 
calculations. 
132

=== PDF PAGE 139 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
Step-by-Step Example – Auto BI Insurer 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 1, we develop an estimate of unpaid claims for an insurer writing private 
passenger automobile bodily injury in one jurisdiction (Auto BI Insurer). For Auto BI Insurer, we 
have nine years (2000 through 2008) of historical accident year claims and premium data. We 
summarize the reported and paid claim development projections in Columns (2) through (7). We 
first present the latest diagonals of the reported and paid claim triangles, claims as of the 
December 31, 2008 valuation date (Columns (2) and (3)). Cumulative claim development factors, 
selected based on Auto BI Insurer’s historical experience, are summarized in Columns (4) and 
(5). We then calculate projected ultimate claims in Columns (6) and (7) using the development 
technique applied to reported and paid claims, respectively. In this example, we develop an initial 
(a priori) estimate of ultimate claims in Column (8) based on the average of the reported and paid 
claim development projections. 
 
Up to this point, the analysis is the same as that described in the previous chapter on the 
development technique. Now, however, we move into new territory. Our goal is to develop an 
expected claim ratio for accident year 2008. The claim ratio will be based on historical claims and 
premiums of Auto BI Insurer. In our calculations, we need both the premiums and claims to be at 
the cost levels expected in 2008. Our first adjustment is to the premiums. We develop on-level 
premiums to account for rate changes implemented during the nine-year experience period. We 
require all premiums for each calendar year 2000 to 2007 to be restated as if 2008 rates were 
effective in each respective year. Such restated premiums are also known as on-level premiums. 
Column (9) contains the on-level earned premium for Auto BI Insurer. 
 
Next we adjust historical claims for changes that will influence the claims of accident year 2008. 
The first adjustment in our example is trend. Actuaries often use the term “trend” to describe 
inflation and other systematic influences on the claims or premiums or both. In this example, the 
only trend reflected is inflation in claims. Through the use of trend factors we adjust historical 
claims to the economic value that would be reported if that same claim occurred in accident year 
2008. Another way of looking at the trend adjustment is to say that we are restating the value of 
the historical claims in 2008 dollars. 
 
In our example we use a 14.5% annual claim trend rate for automobile bodily injury liability 
claims. This trend incorporates both severity and frequency trends for this particular line of 
insurance in the particular jurisdiction in which the coverage is written. Trend rates can vary 
significantly by line of business and by geographic region. Trends can be negative for some lines 
of business and above 20% for other lines of business. Trends can also vary for different periods 
of time within the experience period. If the actuary is going to use the historical experience of the 
insurer to determine an expected claim ratio, it is critical to incorporate the effect of claim trends 
in the analysis.  
 
The second adjustment in our example for Auto BI Insurer is a tort reform adjustment. It is not 
uncommon for states and provinces to legislate changes to the legal environment for lawsuits 
arising out of private passenger automobile accidents. In such situations, historical claims need to 
be restated as if they occurred in the new legal environment. In our example, there was a 
significant reform implemented during 2004. When multiplying historical claims by a reform 
adjustment factor of 0.67, we are removing 33% of the claims for the oldest years in the 
experience period. In essence we are saying that if the same type of claims that occurred in 2000 
through 2003 were to occur in 2008, they would cost 33% less. Since the reform was introduced 
during 2004, the pro rata adjustment factor for 2004 is only 0.75, a 25% reduction. This example 
133

=== PDF PAGE 140 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
demonstrates the significant effect of both trend (e.g., inflation) and tort reform adjustments on 
the claim costs. 
 
Returning to Exhibit I, the projected claims in Column (12) are adjusted by both the trend factor 
and the tort reform adjustment. In Column (13), we present the trended adjusted claim ratios, 
which are equal to the trended adjusted claims divided by the on-level earned premiums. We then 
take various averages of the claim ratios in Line (14). We observe that the claim development 
factors to ultimate for both reported and paid claims are highly leveraged for the most recent 
accident years. The reported claim development factors to ultimate for accident years 2007 and 
2008 are 2.90 and 4.00, respectively; and the paid claim development factors to ultimate for 
accident years 2007 and 2008 are 15.00 and 90.00. Thus, we look at various averages that do not 
include the experience of the most recent years. In Line (15) we select a claim ratio of 80% based 
on a review of the individual projected claim ratios in Column (13) and the averages in Line (14).  
 
The final two steps in our example are to project accident year 2008 expected claims and to 
determine the unpaid claim estimate. The expected claims of $49.6 million (Line (16)) are equal 
to the selected claim ratio of 80% multiplied by the earned premium of $62 million. We calculate 
the estimate of unpaid claims by subtracting paid claims for accident year 2008 from the expected 
claims. The total unpaid claim estimate includes both case outstanding and the broad definition of 
IBNR. Estimated IBNR is equal to the expected claims less reported claims. 
 
 
Step-by-Step Example – GL Self-Insurer 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 2, we present a similar calculation for a public entity self-insurer’s general 
liability program (GL Self-Insurer). We begin again with the reported and paid claim 
development methods, and select an initial estimate of ultimate claims based on the average of the 
two claim development projections (Column (8)). In this example, we use population as our 
exposure base; historical values are summarized in Column (9) of Exhibit I, Sheet 2. Had we used 
an inflation-sensitive exposure base, such as payroll or sales, we would need to consider the 
effect of inflation over the experience period and possibly introduce an exposure trend to adjust 
all exposures to the common economic value of 2008 exposures. 
 
For GL Self-Insurer, we assume that the only adjustment to claims is for trend, and that the 
annual claim trend rate is 7.5%. Again this trend incorporates both severity and frequency trends 
for the jurisdiction in which coverage is provided. An alternative to trending claims and 
exposures separately when the exposures are inflation-sensitive is to use a residual pure premium 
trend rate. For example, in U.S. workers compensation, actuaries frequently use a residual pure 
premium trend that represents the trend in claims that is in excess of the trend in payroll. 
 
After a review of the trended pure premiums in Column (12) and various averages in Line (13), 
we select a pure premium for accident year 2008 of $3.50 per person. We calculate expected 
claims of $2,765,000 by multiplying the selected pure premium of $3.50 by the 2008 population 
(790,000). The total unpaid claim estimate is equal to expected claims less paid claims, and 
estimated IBNR is equal to expected claims less reported claims. 
 
 
134

=== PDF PAGE 141 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
Step-by-Step Example – U.S. Industry Auto 
 
In Exhibits II through V, we continue with the examples presented in Chapter 7. Exhibit II 
contains the expected claims projections for the aggregated results of U.S. private passenger 
automobile insurance (i.e., U.S. Industry Auto). We rely on the selected reported and paid claim 
development factors from Chapter 7 to develop an initial selection of ultimate claims. Columns 
(2) through (7) present detailed calculations for the reported and paid claim development 
projections. We derive the initial selected ultimate claims in Column (8) based on the average of 
the reported and paid claim development projections.  
 
We then divide the initial selected ultimate claims by earned premium for each year to develop 
the estimated claim ratios (Column 10). Since the data in Exhibit II represents the consolidated 
results for the entire U.S. insurance industry, we do not have detailed information regarding rate 
changes and thus can not adjust the premium to an on-level basis.  
 
The example in Exhibit II differs somewhat from the prior two examples in this chapter in the time 
period for which the expected claims method is used. In the first two examples, we use historical 
experience to select an expected claim ratio and an expected pure premium for the 2008 accident 
year only. Thus, we adjusted the exposures and claims for each year in the experience period to the 
2008 cost level. In the example for U.S. Industry Auto, we are projecting ultimate claims for each 
year in the experience period based on the expected claims technique. Thus, we require a claim 
ratio at the cost level expected for each year in the experience period. While it is still advisable for 
the most recent years to review estimated claim ratios from prior years on a trended and adjusted 
basis, many actuaries use significant judgment when selecting expected claim ratios. In our 
example, we select expected claim ratios of 75% for accident years 1998 through 2002 and 65% for 
accident years 2003 through 2007. We incorporate actuarial judgment by selecting two different 
claim ratios to reflect the change in experience that is apparent between the older accident years and 
the more recent accident years. (See Column (10) of Exhibit II, Sheet 1.) 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 2, we calculate the estimated IBNR and the total unpaid claim estimate. 
Estimated IBNR in Column (6) is equal to the expected claims in Column (4) less reported claims 
in Column (2). We then calculate the total unpaid claim estimate as the difference between 
expected claims and paid claims or the sum of case outstanding plus IBNR. It is interesting to 
note that in this example the estimated IBNR is negative for accident years 2000, 2001, and 2003. 
While negative IBNR is possible, particularly for first-party lines of insurance that are subject to 
salvage and subrogation recoveries, it is not intuitively likely for U.S. Industry Auto. Remember 
that the key assumption of the expected claims method is that total claims are a function of an a 
priori estimate and not actual claims activity to date. At times this is a strength of the expected 
claims method and at times, such as in this example, it proves to be a weakness of the method.  
 
The negative IBNR suggests that the selected a priori claim ratio may be too low for certain 
accident years. An alternative approach that avoids a negative IBNR is to use the 65% claim ratio 
assumption for only accident years 2005 through 2007 and to rely on the estimated claim ratios in 
Column (10) for all prior years (i.e., accident years 1998 through 2004). In other words, limit the 
use of the expected claims method to accident years 2005 through 2007. Since the expected claims 
unreported and unpaid for the older years are relatively low, the claim development methods are 
likely reliable projection methods. (Note, that for accident year 2004, the percentage of claim 
unreported at December 31, 2007 is only 2% and the percentage unpaid is 8%.) 
135

=== PDF PAGE 142 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
In Exhibit III, we present the expected claim ratio technique for XYZ Insurer. In the previous 
chapter, we point out the potential shortcomings of the claim development method for this 
particular insurer. The primary assumption of the development technique is that future claims will 
behave in a similar way as historical claims. Due to the various changes experienced by XYZ 
Insurer, this assumption does not likely hold true. We have several alternatives for consideration 
in selecting expected claim ratios for XYZ Insurer. First, we can turn to insurance industry 
experience for benchmark claim ratios. For this particular jurisdiction and coverage, we know 
that ultimate claim ratios for the aggregated experience of the insurance industry are 
approximately 50%. Since XYZ Insurer’s undeveloped reported claim ratios (i.e., current value of 
reported claims prior to development divided by earned premiums) are greater than 70% for six 
of the seven earliest accident years in the experience period, the use of an industry claim ratio 
does not appear reasonable.  
 
Another alternative is to use the unadjusted reported and paid claim development methods as a 
starting point. In Exhibit III, we use the reported and paid development methods to determine an 
initial estimate of ultimate claims. Columns (2) through (8) present these calculations. For 
accident years 1998 through 2003, which are the most mature years in the experience period, we 
select the expected claim ratio based on the average of the estimated claim ratios in Column (10).  
 
For the most recent accident years, 2004 through 2008, we select the expected claim ratios in 
Exhibit III, Sheet 2. Columns (3) through (7) contain trend factors that adjust for inflation; we 
assume an annual claim trend rate of 3.425% (derived based on an annual frequency trend of  
-1.50% and an annual severity trend of 5.00%). We adjust the initial ultimate claims for each year 
in the experience period through the use of these factors to the cost level for each particular year 
under examination (i.e., 2004 through 2008). For example, the trend factor of 0.874, which 
appears at the bottom of Column (3), adjusts accident year 2008 claims to the inflation level 
expected in accident year 2004 (1.03425
(2004-2008)). Similarly, the trend factor of 1.070, which 
appears at the top of Column (3), adjusts accident year 2002 claims to the inflation level expected 
in accident year 2004 (1.03425
(2004-2002)).  
 
We incorporate a second type of adjustment to ultimate claims through the tort reform adjustment 
factors in Columns (8) through (12). These factors adjust the ultimate claims of each accident 
year in the experience period to the tort environment of the particular accident year.  
 
In addition to adjusting claims, we must adjust earned premiums for rate level changes. In 
Chapter 6, we summarize earned premiums and the historical rate level changes for XYZ Insurer. 
In Columns (14) through (18) we present the on-level factors that adjust the earned premiums 
summarized in Column (13) to the rate level for the particular accident year. In other words, this 
adjustment restates the premium as if the exposures were written at the rate level that was in 
effect for each particular year. 
 
In Columns (19) through (23) we present trended and adjusted on-level claim ratios. These claim 
ratios equal the initial estimate of ultimate claims multiplied by the trend factors and the tort 
reform adjustment factors divided by the earned premiums adjusted to the appropriate rate level 
for each year. We examine various averages of the claim ratios by year and select expected claim 
ratios in Line (25) of Exhibit III, Sheet 2. 
 
136

=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
In Exhibit III, Sheet 1, expected claims in Column (12) are calculated as the product of selected 
expected claim ratios in Column (11) and the earned premium in Column (9). Estimated IBNR 
and estimated total unpaid claims are calculated in Exhibit III, Sheet 3. We compare the results of 
the expected claims method with the claim development method in Exhibit III, Sheet 4 (projected 
ultimate claims) and in Exhibit III, Sheet 5 (estimated IBNR). 
 
In later chapters, we discuss other approaches for selecting expected claims for XYZ Insurer. 
 
 
When the Expected Claims Technique Works and When it Does Not 
 
As indicated previously, the expected claims method is often used when an insurer is entering a 
new line of business or a new territory. If actual historical claims experience is not available for 
the insurer, the actuary may be able to turn to insurance industry benchmarks for claim ratios, 
pure premiums, and claim development patterns. Actuaries also use the expected claims 
technique for the most recent years in the experience period when the cumulative claim 
development factors are highly leveraged. 
 
In addition, the expected claims method is often relied upon when an insurer has experienced 
significant change either due to internal factors or external influences. For example, an insurer 
may decide to use an expected claim ratio method for the latest year in the experience period after 
major changes in the legal environment. An increase in the statute of limitations for filing claims 
or expanded coverage due to recent court decisions are examples of changes in the legal 
environment that can affect insurers’ claims liabilities. Of course an important assumption in 
using the expected claim ratio method is that the actuary can estimate a reliable value of the 
expected claim ratio that takes into account such a changing legal environment for the insurance 
coverage. 
 
Since actual claims do not enter into the calculations, the expected claims technique has the 
advantage of maintaining stability over time. The ultimate claims estimate does not change unless 
the exposures or claim ratio (or pure premium) assumptions change. While there is a potential 
advantage in the stability of the projections, there is a potential disadvantage in a lack of 
responsiveness to recent experience. Because, the technique ignores actual claims experience as 
reported, the method is not responsive when the actual claims experience differs from the initial 
expectations. This is evident in the U.S. Industry Auto example presented earlier in this chapter. 
 
There are times, however, when the actuary will judgmentally adjust the claim ratios based on 
historical experience due to a belief that either the pricing or underwriting or both are changing. 
In such a situation, the actuary may be able to adjust the a priori expectation in advance of 
changes being fully manifest in the data. In this circumstance, the expected claims method could 
prove to be more responsive than data-dependent methods. 
 
 
Influence of a Changing Environment on the Expected Claims Technique 
 
In the prior chapter on the development technique, we discuss the performance of the 
development method during times of change. In this section, we continue with these examples 
using the expected claims technique.  
 
 
137

=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
Scenario 1 – U.S. PP Auto Steady-State Environment 
 
In the example for Scenario 1, we assume that the expected claim ratio is equal to 70%, which is 
the same as the ultimate claim ratio. Thus, the expected claims technique generates an appropriate 
estimate of IBNR in a steady-state environment. This is also true of the development technique in 
a steady-state environment. We present detailed calculations for this scenario in the top section of 
Exhibit IV, Sheet 1. 
 
 
Scenario 2 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios 
 
A weakness of the expected claims method is its lack of responsiveness to actual claims 
experience. The projected value of ultimate claims will only change if the actuary changes the 
expected claim ratio assumption. Thus, in Scenario 2, unless the actuary changes the 70% 
expected claim ratio assumption, the projected ultimate claims will be unchanged from Scenario 
1. Since claims are increasing in Scenario 2, the estimated IBNR will be lower than the actual 
IBNR requirements if the actuary estimates unpaid claims using the expected claims method 
without a revision in the expected claim ratios. This example is particularly severe and it is highly 
unlikely that an actuary would proceed with this method without a significant change to the claim 
ratio.   
 
One simple test to assess the adequacy of the expected claim ratio is to compare the reported 
claim ratio to date to the selected claim ratio. Such a comparison may have alerted the actuary to 
the fact that for accident years 2004 through 2008, the reported claim ratios are already greater 
than the expected claim ratio. This simple test would suggest a higher expected claim ratio for 
more recent accident years and avoid the negative values for IBNR seen in Column (6) of Exhibit 
IV, Sheet 1 (bottom section). 
 
 
Scenario 3 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
 
 
We present the calculations for Scenario 3 in the top section of Exhibit IV, Sheet 2. The expected 
claims method produces an accurate estimate of IBNR for this scenario. Changes in the adequacy 
of case outstanding have no effect on the expected claim ratio method since actual claims 
experience does not enter the calculation. 
 
 
Scenario 4 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength 
 
Similar to Scenario 2, IBNR based on the expected claims method for the scenario with 
increasing claim ratios and case outstanding strength falls short of the actual IBNR requirements, 
as shown in the bottom section of Exhibit IV, Sheet 2. The actual IBNR and the estimated IBNR 
differ by the same amount for Scenarios 2 and 4. Without a deliberate change in the expected 
claim ratio assumption, the expected claims method will not react appropriately to an 
environment of changing claim ratios.  
 
 
138

=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique 
 
 
U.S. Auto Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix) 
 
In the top section of Exhibit V, we summarize the calculations for the example of a combined 
portfolio of private passenger and commercial automobile insurance with no change in product 
mix. We assume that we can estimate the expected claim ratio appropriately for the combined 
portfolio. This is much easier when the proportion of each of the two categories remains 
consistent over time. We demonstrate in Exhibit V, that the expected claims technique will 
generate the correct IBNR requirement in times of no change. 
 
 
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix  
 
In the final example, we assume that the volume of commercial automobile insurance is 
increasing at a greater rate than that of private passenger automobile insurance. Since commercial 
automobile insurance has higher ultimate claim ratios, the actuary will need to modify the 
expected claim ratio assumption, which is critical to the expected claims technique. The bottom 
section of Exhibit V demonstrates that without a change in the expected claim ratio, the expected 
claims technique will produce an inadequate estimate of IBNR. 
139

=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit I
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate for Accident Year 2008 Sheet 1
Auto BI Insurer
Projected Ultimate Initial Selected On-Level Trend at Adjustment Trended Trended
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Claims Based on Ultimate Earned 14.5% for Tort Adj. Ultimate Adjusted
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Premium to 7/1/08 Reform Claims Claim Ratio
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13)
2000  10,000,000  9,500,000 1.005 1.050  10,050,000  9,975,000  10,012,500  24,000,000 2.954 0.670  19,816,540 83.0%
2001  8,000,000  7,200,000 1.020 1.150  8,160,000  8,280,000  8,220,000  18,000,000 2.580 0.670  14,209,092 79.0%
2002  9,400,000  7,600,000 1.030 1.250  9,682,000  9,500,000  9,591,000  19,000,000 2.253 0.670  14,477,710 76.0%
2003  15,600,000  7,800,000 1.100 1.350  17,160,000  10,530,000  13,845,000  23,000,000 1.968 0.670  18,255,463 79.0%
2004  16,500,000  11,200,000 1.200 1.750  19,800,000  19,600,000  19,700,000  32,000,000 1.719 0.750  25,398,225 79.0%
2005  18,500,000  10,200,000 1.400 2.500  25,900,000  25,500,000  25,700,000  47,000,000 1.501 1.000  38,575,700 82.0%
2006  16,500,000  6,000,000 1.800 5.000  29,700,000  30,000,000  29,850,000  50,000,000 1.311 1.000  39,133,350 78.0%
2007  14,000,000  3,000,000 2.900 15.000  40,600,000  45,000,000  42,800,000  57,000,000 1.145 1.000  49,006,000 86.0%
2008  8,700,000  750,000 4.000 90.000  34,800,000  67,500,000  51,150,000  62,000,000 1.000 1.000  51,150,000 83.0%
(14) Average Claim Ratio at 7/1/2008 Cost Level
        Average 2000 to 2005 79.7%
        Average 2000 to 2005 Excluding High and Low 79.8%
        Average 2001 to 2006 78.8%
        Average 2001 to 2006 Excluding High and Low 78.8%
(15) Selected Claim Ratio at 7/1/2008 Cost Level 80.0%
(16) Expected Claims for 2008 Accident Year  49,600,000
(17) Unpaid Claim Estimate for 2008 Accident Year
        Total  48,850,000
        IBNR  40,900,000
Column and Line Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data provided by commercial insurer.
(4) and (5) Based on commercial insurer historical claim development experience.
(6) = [(2) x (4)].
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) Based on average of paid and reported claim projections. (8) = [((6) + (7)) / 2].
(9) Based on data provided by commercial insurer.
(10) Assume 14.5% annual trend in private passenger auto bodily injury liability claims. Trend from midpoint of accident year to 7/1/08.
(11) Adjusts for law reforms in private passenger auto implemented during experience period.
(12) = [(8) x (10) x (11)].
(13) = [(12) / (9)].
(14) Various averages of claim ratios in (13).
(15) Selected based on claim ratios by year in (13) and various averages in (14).
(16) Based on selected claim ratio at 2008 cost level and accident year 2008 earned premiums. (16) = [(15) x (9) for 2008].
(17) Total unpaid claim estimate is equal to expected claims in (16) less paid claims for 2008. IBNR is equal to expected claims in (16) less reported claims for 2008.
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_1_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
140

=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit I
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate for Accident Year 2008 Sheet 2
GL Self-Insurer
Projected Ultimate Initial Selected Trend at Trended
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Claims Based on Ultimate 7.5% Ultimate Trended
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Population to 7/1/08 Claims Pure Premium
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998  900,000  890,000 1.015 1.046  913,500  930,940  922,220  709,000 2.061  1,900,695  2.68
1999  1,200,000  1,170,000 1.020 1.067  1,224,000  1,248,390  1,236,195  724,000 1.917  2,369,786  3.27
2000  1,300,000  1,265,000 1.030 1.109  1,339,000  1,402,885  1,370,943  736,000 1.783  2,444,390  3.32
2001  1,800,000  1,600,000 1.051 1.187  1,891,800  1,899,200  1,895,500  740,000 1.659  3,144,635  4.25
2002  1,450,000  1,200,000 1.077 1.306  1,561,650  1,567,200  1,564,425  750,000 1.543  2,413,908  3.22
2003  1,400,000  1,050,000 1.131 1.489  1,583,400  1,563,450  1,573,425  760,000 1.436  2,259,438  2.97
2004  2,400,000  900,000 1.244 1.749  2,985,600  1,574,100  2,279,850  770,000 1.335  3,043,600  3.95
2005  1,800,000  860,000 1.394 2.274  2,509,200  1,955,640  2,232,420  775,000 1.242  2,772,666  3.58
2006  1,500,000  525,000 1.616 3.183  2,424,000  1,671,075  2,047,538  780,000 1.156  2,366,953  3.03
2007  1,200,000  750,000 1.940 5.093  2,328,000  3,819,750  3,073,875  785,000 1.075  3,304,416  4.21
2008  600,000  170,000 3.104 20.373  1,862,400  3,463,410  2,662,905  790,000 1.000  2,662,905  3.37
(13) Average Pure Premium at 7/1/2008 Cost Level
        Average 2000 to 2005  3.55
        Average 2000 to 2005 Excluding High and Low  3.52
        Average 2001 to 2006  3.50
        Average 2001 to 2006 Excluding High and Low  3.45
(14) Selected Pure Premium at 7/1/2008 Cost Level  3.50
(15) Expected Claims for 2008 Accident Year  2,765,000
(16) Unpaid Claim Estimate for 2008 Accident Year
        Total  2,595,000
        IBNR  2,165,000
Column and Line Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data provided by public entity.
(4) and (5) Based on insurance industry benchmark claim development patterns.
(6) = [(2) x (4)].
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) Based on average of paid and reported claim projections. (8) = [((6) + (7)) / 2].
(9) Based on data provided by public entity.
(10) Assume 7.5% annual trend in general liability claims. Trend from midpoint of accident year to 7/1/08.
(11) = [(8) x (10)].
(12) Pure premium based on population. (12) = [(11) / (9)].
(13) Various averages of pure premium in (12).
(14) Selected based on pure premium by year in (12) and various averages in (13).
(15) Based on selected pure premium at 2008 cost level and accident year 2008 population. (15) = [(14) x (9) for 2008].
(16) Total unpaid claim estimate is equal to expected claims in (15) less paid claims for 2008. IBNR is equal to expected claims in (15) less reported claims for 2008.
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_1_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
141

=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit II
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 1
Projection of Expected Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims Initial Selected
Accident Claims at 12/31/07 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Ultimate Earned Claim Ratio Expected
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Premium Estimated Selected Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998  47,742,304  47,644,187 1.000 1.002  47,742,304  47,739,475  47,740,890  68,574,209 69.6% 75.0%  51,430,657
1999  51,185,767  51,000,534 1.000 1.004  51,185,767  51,204,536  51,195,152  68,544,981 74.7% 75.0%  51,408,736
2000  54,837,929  54,533,225 1.001 1.006  54,892,767  54,860,424  54,876,596  68,907,977 79.6% 75.0%  51,680,983
2001  56,299,562  55,878,421 1.003 1.011  56,468,461  56,493,084  56,480,772  72,544,955 77.9% 75.0%  54,408,716
2002  58,592,712  57,807,215 1.006 1.020  58,944,268  58,963,359  58,953,814  79,228,887 74.4% 75.0%  59,421,665
2003  57,565,344  55,930,654 1.011 1.040  58,198,563  58,167,880  58,183,221  86,643,542 67.2% 65.0%  56,318,302
2004  56,976,657  53,774,672 1.023 1.085  58,287,120  58,345,519  58,316,320  91,763,523 63.6% 65.0%  59,646,290
2005  56,786,410  50,644,994 1.051 1.184  59,682,517  59,963,673  59,823,095  94,115,312 63.6% 65.0%  61,174,953
2006  54,641,339  43,606,497 1.110 1.404  60,651,886  61,223,522  60,937,704  95,272,279 64.0% 65.0%  61,926,981
2007  48,853,563  27,229,969 1.292 2.390  63,118,803  65,079,626  64,099,215  95,176,240 67.3% 65.0%  61,864,556
Column and Line Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(6) = [(2) x (4)].
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) Based on average of paid and reported claim projections. (8) = [((6) + (7)) / 2].
(9) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(10) = [(8) / (9)].
(11) Selected judgmentally based on experience in (10).
(12) = [(9) x (11)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_2_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
142

=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit II
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 2
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Case Unpaid Claim Estimate Based
Accident Claims at 12/31/07 Expected Outstanding on Expected Claims Method
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/07 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  47,742,304  47,644,187  51,430,657  98,117  3,688,353  3,786,470
1999  51,185,767  51,000,534  51,408,736  185,233  222,969  408,202
2000  54,837,929  54,533,225  51,680,983  304,704 - 3,156,946 - 2,852,242
2001  56,299,562  55,878,421  54,408,716  421,141 - 1,890,846 - 1,469,705
2002  58,592,712  57,807,215  59,421,665  785,497  828,953  1,614,450
2003  57,565,344  55,930,654  56,318,302  1,634,690 - 1,247,042  387,648
2004  56,976,657  53,774,672  59,646,290  3,201,985  2,669,633  5,871,618
2005  56,786,410  50,644,994  61,174,953  6,141,416  4,388,543  10,529,959
2006  54,641,339  43,606,497  61,926,981  11,034,842  7,285,642  18,320,484
2007  48,853,563  27,229,969  61,864,556  21,623,594  13,010,993  34,634,587
Total  543,481,587  498,050,368  569,281,839  45,431,219  25,800,252  71,231,471
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(4) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(4) - (3)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_2_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
143

=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Projection of Expected Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims Initial Selected
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Ultimate Earned Claim Ratio Expected
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Premium Estimated Selected Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998  15,822  15,822 1.000 1.010  15,822  15,980  15,901  20,000 79.5% 78.3%  15,660
1999  25,107  24,817 0.999 1.014  25,082  25,164  25,123  31,500 79.8% 78.3%  24,665
2000  37,246  36,782 0.992 1.031  36,948  37,922  37,435  45,000 83.2% 78.3%  35,235
2001  38,798  38,519 0.992 1.054  38,487  40,600  39,543  50,000 79.1% 78.3%  39,150
2002  48,169  44,437 1.003 1.116  48,313  49,592  48,953  61,183 80.0% 78.3%  47,906
2003  44,373  39,320 1.013 1.268  44,950  49,858  47,404  69,175 68.5% 78.3%  54,164
2004  70,288  52,811 1.064 1.525  74,787  80,537  77,662  99,322 78.2% 87.1%  86,509
2005  70,655  40,026 1.085 2.007  76,661  80,333  78,497  138,151 56.8% 78.3%  108,172
2006  48,804  22,819 1.196 3.160  58,370  72,108  65,239  107,578 60.6% 65.8%  70,786
2007  31,732  11,865 1.512 6.569  47,979  77,941  62,960  62,438 100.8% 63.8%  39,835
2008  18,632  3,409 2.551 21.999  47,530  74,995  61,262  47,797 128.2% 82.5%  39,433
Column and Line Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheets 1 and 2.
(6) = [(2) x (4)].
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) Based on average of paid and reported claim projections. (8) = [((6) + (7)) / 2].
(9) Based on data from insurer.
(10) = [(8) / (9)].
(11) Selected for 1998 through 2003, based on average of estimated claim ratios in (10) for these years. For 2004 through 2008, selected in Exhibit III, Sheet 2.
(12) = [(9) x (11)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_3_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
144

=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Selection of Expected Claim Ratios ($000)
Initial Selected
Accident Ultimate Trend Adjustment Tort Reform Adjustment
Year Claims 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
2002 48,953          1.070          1.106          1.144          1.183          1.224          1.000          1.000          0.893          0.670          0.670          
2003 47,404          1.034          1.070          1.106          1.144          1.183          1.000          1.000          0.893          0.670          0.670          
2004 77,662          1.000          1.034          1.070          1.106          1.144          1.000          1.000          0.893          0.670          0.670          
2005 78,497          0.967          1.000          1.034          1.070          1.106          1.000          1.000          0.893          0.670          0.670          
2006 65,239          0.935          0.967          1.000          1.034          1.070          1.119          1.119          1.000          0.750          0.750          
2007 62,960          0.904          0.935          0.967          1.000          1.034          1.493          1.493          1.333          1.000          1.000          
2008 61,262          0.874          0.904          0.935          0.967          1.000          1.493          1.493          1.333          1.000          1.000          
Accident Earned Rate Level Adjustment Trended, Adjusted On-Level Claim Ratios
Year Premium 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
(1) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23)
2002 61,183          1.129          1.298          1.428          1.142          0.914          75.8% 68.2% 57.3% 55.5% 71.8%
2003 69,175          1.075          1.236          1.360          1.088          0.870          65.9% 59.3% 49.8% 48.3% 62.4%
2004 99,322          1.000          1.150          1.265          1.012          0.810          78.2% 70.3% 59.1% 57.3% 74.0%
2005 138,151        0.870          1.000          1.100          0.880          0.704          63.2% 56.8% 47.7% 46.3% 59.8%
2006 107,578        0.791          0.909          1.000          0.800          0.640          80.3% 72.2% 60.6% 58.8% 76.0%
2007 62,438          0.988          1.136          1.250          1.000          0.800          137.7% 123.8% 104.0% 100.8% 130.3%
2008 47,797          1.235          1.420          1.563          1.250          1.000          135.4% 121.7% 102.3% 99.2% 128.2%
(24) Average Claim Ratios
           All Years 90.9% 81.8% 68.7% 66.6% 86.1%
           All Years excluding High and Low 87.1% 78.3% 65.8% 63.8% 82.5%
           Latest 5 Years 98.9% 89.0% 74.7% 72.5% 93.7%
           Latest 3 Years 117.8% 105.9% 89.0% 86.3% 111.5%
(25) Selected Expected Claim Ratio 87.1% 78.3% 65.8% 63.8% 82.5%
Column and Line Notes:
(2) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(3) through (7) Assume annual pure premium trend rate of 3.425%. Adjust all claims in experience period to average cost level of particular accident year.
(8) through (12) Based on independent analysis of tort reform. Adjust all claims in experience period to tort environment of particular accident year.
(13) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(14) through (18) Based on rate level changes summarized in Chapter 6. Adjusts earned premium to rate level in effect for particular accident year.
                             Students should refer to ratemaking papers for the on-level factors calculation procedure.
(19) through (23) Equal to [(initial selected ultimate claims x trend adjustment x tort reform adjustment) / (earned premium x rate level adjustment)].
(24) Averages based on claim ratios in (19) through (23).
(25) Selected based on review of claim ratios by year in (19) through (23) and average claim ratios in (24).
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_3_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
145

=== PDF PAGE 152 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Case Unpaid Claim Estimate Based
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Expected Outstanding on Expected Claims Method
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,660 0 - 162 - 162
1999  25,107  24,817  24,665  290 - 442 - 152
2000  37,246  36,782  35,235  465 - 2,011 - 1,547
2001  38,798  38,519  39,150  278  352  631
2002  48,169  44,437  47,906  3,731 - 262  3,469
2003  44,373  39,320  54,164  5,052  9,791  14,844
2004  70,288  52,811  86,509  17,477  16,221  33,698
2005  70,655  40,026  108,172  30,629  37,517  68,146
2006  48,804  22,819  70,786  25,985  21,982  47,967
2007  31,732  11,865  39,835  19,867  8,103  27,970
2008  18,632  3,409  39,433  15,223  20,801  36,024
Total  449,626  330,629  561,516  118,997  111,890  230,887
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(4) - (3)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_3_3 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
146

=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Development Method Expected
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,660
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  24,665
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  35,235
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  39,150
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  47,906
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  54,164
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  86,509
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  108,172
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  70,786
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  39,835
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  39,433
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  561,516
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_3_4 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
147

=== PDF PAGE 154 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Summary of IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR
Accident Outstanding Development Method Expected
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1998 0 0  158 - 162
1999  290 - 25  58 - 442
2000  465 - 298  676 - 2,011
2001  278 - 310  1,802  352
2002  3,731  145  1,423 - 262
2003  5,052  577  5,485  9,791
2004  17,477  4,498  10,249  16,221
2005  30,629  6,006  9,678  37,517
2006  25,985  9,566  23,304  21,982
2007  19,867  16,247  46,209  8,103
2008  15,223  28,898  56,363  20,801
Total  118,997  65,303  155,405  111,890
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) and (4) Estimated in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) Estimated in Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_3_5 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
148

=== PDF PAGE 155 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 1
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Expected Reported Difference
Accident Earned Claim Expected Claims at Estimated Actual from
Year Premium Ratio Claims 12/31/08 IBNR IBNR Actual IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Steady-State
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000  700,000000
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000  735,000000
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750  771,750000
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338  810,338000
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509  8,509 0
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397  884,463  8,934  8,934 0
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067  919,306  18,761  18,761 0
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970  935,722  49,249  49,249 0
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219  930,797  103,422  103,422 0
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930  836,166  249,764  249,764 0
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  8,365,887  438,638  438,638 0
Increasing Claim Ratios
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000  700,000000
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000  735,000000
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750  771,750000
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338  810,338000
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509  8,509 0
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397  1,010,815 - 117,418  10,210  127,628
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067  1,116,300 - 178,233  22,782  201,014
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970  1,203,071 - 218,101  63,320  281,420
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219  1,263,224 - 229,006  140,358  369,364
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930  1,194,523 - 108,593  356,805  465,398
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  9,647,366 - 842,841  601,984  1,444,824
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) Assumed equal to 70% for all years.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4.
(6) = [(4) - (5)].
(7) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(8) = [(7) - (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_4_1 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
149

=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 2
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Expected Reported Difference
Accident Earned Claim Expected Claims at Estimated Actual from
Year Premium Ratio Claims 12/31/08 IBNR IBNR Actual IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000  700,000000
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000  735,000000
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750  771,750000
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338  810,338000
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509  8,509 0
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397  884,463  8,934  8,934 0
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067  933,377  4,690  4,690 0
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970  962,808  22,162  22,162 0
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219  979,922  54,296  54,296 0
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930  931,185  154,745  154,745 0
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  8,551,189  253,336  253,336 0
Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000  700,000000
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000  735,000000
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750  771,750000
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338  810,338000
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854  842,346  8,509  8,509 0
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397  1,010,815 - 117,418  10,210  127,628
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067  1,133,386 - 195,319  5,695  201,014
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970  1,237,897 - 252,926  28,494  281,420
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219  1,329,895 - 295,676  73,688  369,364
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930  1,330,264 - 244,334  221,064  465,398
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  9,901,689 - 1,097,165  347,660  1,444,824
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) Assumed equal to 70% for all years.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 8.
(6) = [(4) - (5)].
(7) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(8) = [(7) - (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_4_2 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
150

=== PDF PAGE 157 ===
Chapter 8 - Expected Claims Technique Exhibit V
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example
U.S. Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Expected Reported Difference
Accident Earned Claim Expected Claims at Estimated Actual from
Year Premium Ratio Claims 12/31/08 IBNR IBNR Actual IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999  2,000,000 75.0%  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0
2000  2,100,000 75.0%  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0
2001  2,205,000 75.0%  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0
2002  2,315,250 75.0%  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0
2003  2,431,013 75.0%  1,823,259  1,814,751  8,509  8,509 0
2004  2,552,563 75.0%  1,914,422  1,885,068  29,354  29,354 0
2005  2,680,191 75.0%  2,010,143  1,948,499  61,644  61,644 0
2006  2,814,201 75.0%  2,110,651  1,937,577  173,073  173,073 0
2007  2,954,911 75.0%  2,216,183  1,852,729  363,454  363,454 0
2008  3,102,656 75.0%  2,326,992  1,568,393  758,599  758,599 0
Total  25,155,785  18,866,839  17,472,204  1,394,634  1,394,634 0
Changing Product Mix
1999  2,000,000 75.0%  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0
2000  2,100,000 75.0%  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0
2001  2,205,000 75.0%  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0
2002  2,315,250 75.0%  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0
2003  2,431,013 75.0%  1,823,259  1,814,751  8,509  8,509 0
2004  2,552,563 75.0%  1,914,422  1,885,068  29,354  29,354 0
2005  2,999,262 75.0%  2,249,446  2,193,545  55,901  71,855  15,954
2006  3,564,016 75.0%  2,673,012  2,471,446  201,566  239,057  37,491
2007  4,281,446 75.0%  3,211,085  2,680,487  530,597  596,924  66,327
2008  5,196,516 75.0%  3,897,387  2,556,695  1,340,692  1,445,385  104,693
Total  29,645,066  22,233,799  20,067,179  2,166,620  2,391,084  224,465
Column Notes:
(2) For no change scenario, assume $2,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual
   increase thereafter. For change scenario, assume annual increase of 30% for commercial auto
   beginning in 2005.
(3) Assumed equal to 75% for all years.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 4.
(6) = [(4) - (5)].
(7) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(8) = [(7) - (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 8_5 04/03/2009 - 2:57 PM
151

=== PDF PAGE 158 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 – BORNHUETTER-FERGUSON TECHNIQUE 
 
 
Actuaries rely on the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique almost as often as they rely on the 
development method. The Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique is essentially a blend of the 
development and expected claims techniques. In the development technique, we multiply actual 
claims by a cumulative claim development factor. This technique can lead to erratic, unreliable 
projections when the cumulative development factor is large because a relatively small swing in 
reported claims or the reporting of an unusually large claim could result in a very large swing in 
projected ultimate claims. In the expected claims technique, the unpaid claim estimate is equal to 
the difference between a predetermined estimate of expected claims and the actual payments. 
This has the advantage of stability, but it completely ignores actual results as reported. The 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique combines the two techniques by splitting ultimate claims into 
two components: actual reported (or paid) claims and expected unreported (or unpaid) claims. As 
experience matures, more weight is given to the actual claims and the expected claims become 
gradually less important. 
 
In the 1993 paper “Loss Development Using Credibility,”
53 Eric Brosius described the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method as a credibility weighting between the development method and 
the expected claims method. In the development method, full credibility (i.e., Z = 1) is given to 
actual claims experience; and in the expected claims method, no credibility (i.e., Z = 0) is given 
to actual claims. In the Bornhuetter-Ferguson, credibility is equal to the percentage of claims 
developed at a particular stage of maturity, which is a function of the cumulative claim 
development factor (i.e., Z = 1.00 / cumulative development factor). Therefore, more weight is 
given to the expected claims method in less mature years, and more weight is given to the 
development method in more mature years of the experience period. 
 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
The key assumption of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is that unreported (or unpaid) claims 
will develop based on expected claims. In other words, the claims reported to date contain no 
informational value as to the amount of claims yet-to-be reported. This is different from the 
development method where the primary assumption is that unreported (or unpaid) claims will 
develop based on reported (or paid) claims to date. 
 
The reporting and payment patterns used in the Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods are the same as 
those selected in the development method. However, the application of the development factors 
differs between the two methods. It is also important to note that the expected claims used in the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using reported claims are the same as those used in the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using paid claims. 
 
 
Common Uses of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
The Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique is most frequently applied to reported and paid claims, yet it 
can also be used with the number of claims and with ALAE. Actuaries use this technique with all 
lines of insurance including short-tail lines and long-tail lines. Similar to the development  
                                                 
53 CAS Study Note, 1993 
152

=== PDF PAGE 159 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
method, the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is used with data organized in many different time 
intervals including: 
 
 Accident year 
 Policy year 
 Underwriting year 
 Report year 
 Fiscal year 
 
Actuaries also apply this technique to data organized by month, quarter, or half-year. 
 
 
Mechanics of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
As indicated previously, the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique is a blend of two other methods: the 
development method and the expected claims method. The following two formulae represent the 
reported and paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods, respectively: 
 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Reported Claims + Expected Unreported Claims 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Reported Claims + (Expected Claims) x (% Unreported)  
 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Paid Claims + Expected Unpaid Claims 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Paid Claims + (Expected Claims) x (% Unpaid)  
 
Since actual reported and paid claims are both known quantities, the challenge of the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is to calculate the expected unreported and expected unpaid claims. 
In order to complete the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, the actuary must select claim 
development patterns and develop an expected claims estimate. 
 
In our step-by-step example of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, we use the cumulative claim 
development patterns presented in Chapter 7 and the expected claims developed in Chapter 8.
54 In 
Exhibit I, Sheet 1, we present both the reported and paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson projections for 
U.S. Industry Auto. 
 
The second column of Exhibit I, Sheet 1, contains the expected claims developed in Chapter 8 for 
U.S. Industry Auto. Columns (3) and (4) are the selected cumulative claim development factors 
described in Chapter 7. We convert the cumulative claim development patterns to percentage 
unreported and percentage unpaid in Columns (5) and (6), respectively. The percentage reported 
is equal to the inverse of the cumulative reported claim development factor. Thus, the percentage 
unreported is equal to 1.00 minus the inverse of the cumulative reported claim development 
factor. Similarly, the percentage paid is equal to the inverse of the cumulative paid claim 
                                                 
54 Recall that expected claims are developed in Chapter 8 based on earned premiums and selected claim 
ratios. We discussed the importance of adjusting premiums to an on-level basis when selecting expected 
claim ratios. The purpose of adjusting premiums to an on-level basis is to develop a proxy for the 
underlying exposures in each year of the experience period. An alternative to the use of premiums and 
claim ratios for developing expected claims is exposures and pure premiums (also referred to as loss rates 
or loss costs). Many actuaries who work with self-insurers rely on such an approach. Due to enhancements 
in many insurers’ data systems, historical exposures may become more readily available to actuaries and 
can thus be directly incorporated into the development of expected claims for the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
technique. 
153

=== PDF PAGE 160 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
development factor; and the percentage unpaid is equal to 1.00 minus the inverse of the 
cumulative paid claim development factor. 
 
Once again, we summarize the selected claim development factors for reported and paid claims as 
well as the associated reporting and payment patterns in Table 1 below. 
 
Table 1 – U.S. Industry Auto 
Selected Reporting and Payment Patterns  
  Reported Claims  Paid Claims 
Age 
(Month) 
 CDF to 
Ultimate 
% 
Reported 
% 
Unreported 
 CDF to 
Ultimate 
% 
Paid 
% 
Unpaid 
12 1.292 77.4% 22.6% 2.390 41.8% 58.2% 
24 1.110 90.1% 9.9% 1.404 71.2% 28.8% 
36 1.051 95.1% 4.9% 1.184 84.5% 15.5% 
48 1.023 97.8% 2.2% 1.085 92.2% 7.8% 
60 1.011 98.9% 1.1% 1.040 96.2% 3.8% 
72 1.006 99.4% 0.6% 1.020 98.0% 2.0% 
84 1.003 99.7% 0.3% 1.011 98.9% 1.1% 
96 1.001 99.9% 0.1% 1.006 99.4% 0.6% 
108 1.000 100.0% 0.0% 1.004 99.6% 0.4% 
120 1.000 100.0% 0.0% 1.002 99.8% 0.2% 
 
The primary assumption of the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is that unreported claims 
will emerge in accordance with expected claims. Thus, the next step of this method is to calculate 
the expected unreported claims. In Column (7), we calculate expected unreported claims by 
accident year. Expected unreported claims are equal to expected claims in Column (2) multiplied 
by the percentage unreported in Column (5) for each year. Similarly, expected unpaid claims in 
Column (8) are equal to expected claims from Column (2) multiplied by the percentage unpaid in 
Column (6).  
 
Returning to our original formulae for the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, 
 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Reported Claims + Expected Unreported Claims 
  
Ultimate Claims = Actual Paid Claims + Expected Unpaid Claims 
 
We can now calculate the projected ultimate claims. Using the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
method, projected ultimate claims in Column (11) are equal to the actual reported claims in 
Column (9) plus the expected unreported claims in Column (7). The projected ultimate claims 
based on the paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson method are shown in Column (12); they are equal to 
actual paid claims in Column (10) plus expected unpaid claims in Column (8). 
 
 
Unpaid Claim Estimate Based on Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
We follow a similar procedure for determining the unpaid claim estimate based on the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique (Exhibit I, Sheet 2) as presented in the prior chapters for the 
development and expected claims techniques. Estimated IBNR is equal to projected ultimate 
154

=== PDF PAGE 161 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
claims less reported claims55 and the total unpaid claim estimate is equal to the difference 
between projected ultimate claims and paid claims.  
 
Exhibit I, Sheet 2, presents the calculations of the unpaid claim estimate for U.S. Industry Auto. 
Columns (2) and (3) contain reported and paid claims data as of December 31, 2007. The 
projected ultimate claims, developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 1, are summarized in Columns (4) and 
(5). Case outstanding, which are equal to the difference between reported claims and paid claims 
as of December 31, 2007, are presented in Column (6). Estimated IBNR is equal to projected 
ultimate claims minus reported claims. In Columns (7) and (8), we calculate estimated IBNR 
based on the reported and paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques, respectively. The total unpaid 
claim estimate is equal to the sum of case outstanding and estimated IBNR. We present the 
estimate of total unpaid claims in Columns (9) and (10) based on the reported and paid 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques, respectively. 
 
 
When the Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Works and When it Does Not 
 
An advantage of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique is that random fluctuations early in the life 
of an accident year (or other defined time interval) do not significantly distort the projections. For 
example, if several large and unusual claims are reported for an accident year, then the reported 
claim development technique may produce overly conservative ultimate claims estimates. This 
situation does not, however, seriously distort the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. 
 
Actuaries frequently use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method for long-tail lines of insurance, 
particularly for the most immature years, due to the highly leveraged nature of claim development 
factors for such lines. Actuaries may also use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique if the data is 
extremely thin or volatile or both. For example, when an insurer has recently entered a new line 
of business or a new territory and there is not yet a credible volume of historical claim 
development experience, an actuary may use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. In such 
circumstances, the actuary would likely need to rely on benchmarks, either from similar lines at 
the same insurer or insurance industry experience, for development patterns and expected claim 
ratios (or pure premiums). (See previous comments about the use of industry benchmarks.) 
 
In a discussion of when to use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method in the paper “The Actuary and 
IBNR,” the authors state: “It can be argued that the most prudent course is, when in doubt, to use 
expected losses, in as much as it is certainly indicated for volatile lines, and in the case of a stable 
line, the expected loss ratio should be predictable enough so that both techniques produce the 
same result.”
56 
 
The Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique can be a useful method for very short-tail lines as well as 
long-tail lines. For very short-tail lines, the IBNR can be set equal to a multiple of the last few 
months’ earned premium; this is essentially an application of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
technique. 
                                                 
55 Recall that the formula for the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is:  
Ultimate Claims = Actual Reported Claims + Expected Unreported Claims 
Thus, for the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson projection, the expected unreported claims are equal to the 
estimated IBNR. 
 
56 PCAS, 1972. 
155

=== PDF PAGE 162 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
The Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method and Cumulative CDFs Less than 1.00 
 
Downward development (i.e., cumulative development factors that are less than 1.00) does occur 
for some insurers, for some lines of business. Automobile physical damage and property are 
examples of coverages in which actuaries can observe this type of development experience. For 
some insurers, salvage and subrogation recoveries lag the reporting and payment of claims, which 
can result in report-to-report factors that are less than 1.00. For some insurers, a conservative 
philosophy regarding case outstanding can also result in an observed downward development of 
reported claims as payments for claims may be less than the case outstanding set by claims 
adjusters. For those lines of business for which the actuary derives cumulative claim development 
factors that are less than 1.00, we revisit the original premise of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
method.  
 
At the beginning of this chapter, we refer to Brosius’ description of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
method as a credibility-weighting between the development method and the expected claims 
method. Credibility is concerned with the combination of the projections from these two methods. 
The basic formula for calculating the credibility-weighted projection is: 
 
[(Z) x (development method)] + [(1 – Z) x (expected claims method)], 
 
where, 
0 ≤ Z ≤ 1, 
Z is the credibility assigned to the development method, and 
(1 – Z) is the complement of credibility assigned to the expected claims method. 
 
As noted earlier, the credibility is equal to the percentage of claims developed at a particular stage 
of maturity, which is a function of the cumulative claim development factor (Z = 1.000 / 
cumulative development factor). 
 
From a theoretical perspective, the credibility-weighting approach of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
method does not hold true if the cumulative development factor is less than 1.00 since the value 
assigned to credibility, Z, is then greater than 1.00. For example, if the cumulative development 
factor is 0.93, then the credibility assigned to the development method is equal to 1.075 (1.00 / 
0.93). However, as defined above, credibility must be a value between 0 and 1. Thus, a credibility 
value of 1.075 is outside of the acceptable range.  
 
While cumulative development factors that are less than 1.00 present a theoretical issue for the 
use of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, in practice, many actuaries continue to use this method 
with such factors. One solution to address this theoretical challenge is to limit the cumulative 
development factors to a minimum value of 1.00 when applying the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
technique. (We follow this approach for the examples in this text.) Alternatively, and what 
happens quite frequently in practice, is that the actuary will still calculate the reported 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson projected ultimate claims using cumulative development factors that are 
less than 1.00 but will rely on another technique to select ultimate claims for the year(s) in 
question (i.e., years with cumulative development factors less than 1.00). As noted previously in 
this chapter, actuaries frequently use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method for long-tail lines of 
insurance, particularly for the most immature years. Cumulative development factors for these 
lines and years are typically much greater than 1.00. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to note that 
some actuaries continue to include the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method as part of their analyses 
even in the presence of cumulative development factors that are less than 1.00. 
156

=== PDF PAGE 163 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheets 1 and 2, we present the results of the reported and paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
methods based on the expected claims developed in Chapter 8 for XYZ Insurer. The presentation 
and calculations are identical to the previous example for U.S. Industry Auto (Exhibit I). We will 
not examine the results of this projection in detail because we know that the expected claims 
estimates underlying the projections are likely inaccurate. Remember that the primary assumption 
of the development method does not hold true for XYZ Insurer as a result of the operational and 
environmental changes that took place during the experience period. Nevertheless, we derive the 
current estimates of expected claims using unadjusted reported and paid claim development 
methods. We compare the results of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method with the expected claims 
method and the development method in Exhibit II, Sheet 3 (projected ultimate claims) and in 
Exhibit II, Sheet 4 (estimated IBNR). In later chapters, we look at alternative methods that can be 
used for developing expected claims for use in a revised Bornhuetter-Ferguson method.  
 
 
Influence of a Changing Environment on the Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method57 
 
In Chapters 7 and 8, we discuss the performance of the development technique and the expected 
claims technique, respectively, during times of change. We continue with these examples using 
the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. Since the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is a combination of 
the development method and the expected claims method, we will refer you to these prior 
chapters for critical input. For example, refer to Chapter 7 for the reported and paid claim 
development triangles and the selection of age-to-age factors, and refer to Chapter 8 for the 
calculation of expected claims. 
 
 
Scenario 1 – U.S. PP Auto Steady-State 
 
For Scenarios 1 through 4, we use an expected claim ratio of 70%. Since the steady-state 
environment also has a 70% ultimate claim ratio, the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique generates 
an accurate estimate of IBNR. We see in Chapters 7 and 8, that the development and expected 
claims techniques also generate accurate IBNR values in a steady-state environment. Detailed 
calculations are presented for the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method in the top section of Exhibit III, 
Sheet 1. 
 
 
                                                 
57 We present the following examples to demonstrate the effect of not changing assumptions on the 
resulting projections of ultimate claims and the estimate of unpaid claims. We recognize that the examples 
are not necessarily representative of real-life applications of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method since we 
assume that there are no adjustments in expected claims in anticipation of the events that caused higher 
claim ratios or changes in business mix. Most insurers have a feel for whether a market is getting softer or 
harder, so they would have a sense as to the direction to adjust the expected claims, if not the absolute 
amount of adjustment. In addition, actuaries typically use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique where 
development data is sparse and erratic, which is exactly where the development approaches are very weak. 
Hence, we note that the PP Auto examples are biased against a Bornhuetter-Ferguson approach. 
157

=== PDF PAGE 164 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
Scenario 2 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios  
 
The weakness of the expected claims method is also a weakness of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
method. Remember the original formulae for the reported and paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
method: 
 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Reported Claims + Expected Unreported Claims 
 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Paid Claims + Expected Unpaid Claims 
 
While projected ultimate claims are increasing between Scenarios 1 and 2, the increases are due 
to higher values of actual reported and paid claims and not higher estimates of the expected 
unreported and unpaid claims. Since the expected claims estimate does not change in this 
example, the expected unreported and unpaid claims do not change in Scenario 2 from the steady-
state values of Scenario 1.  
 
For the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique, the estimated IBNR is identical between the 
steady-state environment and the environment with increasing claim ratios. Without a deliberate 
change in the expected claim ratio, this method will not respond to a situation with increasing 
claim ratios. The paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson performs even worse than the reported Bornhuetter-
Ferguson technique for Scenario 2. The estimate of expected unpaid claims is understated to an 
even greater degree than the expected unreported claims. This is due to the longer-term nature of 
the payment pattern than the reporting pattern, which implies that the percentage unpaid cannot 
be less than the percentage unreported at any age. (See Table 5 of Chapter 7, which summarizes 
the reporting and payment patterns.) 
 
 
Scenario 3 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength 
 
We present the calculations for Scenario 3 in the top section of Exhibit III, Sheet 2. The reported 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique produces an estimate of IBNR that is greater than the actual 
IBNR for this scenario. Similar to the paid claim development technique, the paid Bornhuetter-
Ferguson method is unaffected by changes only in case outstanding strength. 
 
In Chapter 7, we saw how increases in case outstanding strength led to increases in age-to-age 
factors and in cumulative claim development factors. The cumulative claim development factors 
are an important input to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method. Thus, if the cumulative claim 
development factors are changing due to increases in case outstanding strength, it will also have 
an effect on the Bornhuetter-Ferguson projection. The expected claims, on the other hand, remain 
unchanged.  
 
The estimated IBNR, in this scenario, based on the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is 
greater than the actual IBNR requirement. However, the overstatement is less for the reported 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method than for the reported claim development method because we did 
not increase the expected claims. In Chapter 7, we discuss how there are two forces that 
contribute to the excessive estimate of IBNR in the development technique. First, age-to-age 
factors increase due to the change in case outstanding adequacy. Second, we then multiply the 
resulting higher cumulative claim development factors by the latest valuation of reported claims, 
which contains higher reported values due to the increase in case outstanding strength. There is, 
in essence, a leveraging effect of higher factors and higher claims in the development technique. 
In the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, the higher cumulative claim development factors result in 
158

=== PDF PAGE 165 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
greater percentages of expected unreported claims. However, the same leveraging effect does not 
exist since expected claims, not actual claims, are the basis for determining unreported claims in 
the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, and the expected claims did not change in our example. 
 
 
Scenario 4 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
 
 
We present the detailed calculations for Scenario 4 in the bottom section of Exhibit III, Sheet 2. 
We see that the estimated IBNR based on the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is 
overstated while the paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson projection is understated, absent a change in the 
expected claims assumption.  
 
For both projections, the expected claims used in the example are too low. This is the reason that 
the paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson method produces an estimate of IBNR that is $443,260 lower than 
the actual IBNR. This is the same difference between estimated and actual IBNR that we saw in 
Scenario 2, where claim ratios increased and case outstanding strength remained stable. Since the 
payment pattern is unaffected by changes in case outstanding adequacy, there is no effect on the 
paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson method. The sole reason for the inadequacy of the paid Bornhuetter-
Ferguson method is the understatement of expected claims. 
 
In Scenario 2 (increasing claim ratios and stable case outstanding strength), we see that the 
reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique produces an estimated IBNR that is lower than the 
actual IBNR. In Scenario 3 (stable claim ratio and increasing case outstanding strength), the 
estimated IBNR based on the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson method is too high. These two 
factors work in opposition in Scenario 4, in which both claim ratios and case outstanding strength 
are increasing. Even though expected claims are too low for Scenario 4, there is more than an 
offsetting effect from the higher cumulative development factors leading to an estimated IBNR 
for the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique that is $112,773 higher than the actual IBNR.  
 
In Scenario 4, with increasing claim ratios and case outstanding strengthening, the difference 
from the actual IBNR using the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method could be positive or negative 
depending on the extent of case outstanding strengthening and deteriorating claim ratio. 
 
 
U.S. Auto Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix) 
 
In the last two examples, we present the projections for a combined portfolio of private passenger 
and commercial automobile. In the top section of Exhibit IV, we summarize the calculations 
assuming a steady-state (i.e., no change in product mix). Similar to our projections using the 
claim development and expected claims techniques, we demonstrate in Exhibit IV, that the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique will generate the correct IBNR requirement if there is no change 
in the product mix. 
 
 
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix  
 
In the final example, we assume that the volume of commercial automobile insurance is 
increasing at a greater rate than that of private passenger automobile insurance. In the bottom 
section of Exhibit IV, we quickly observe that both the reported and paid Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
159

=== PDF PAGE 166 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
methods produce estimated IBNR that is lower than the actual IBNR. This is due to the expected 
claim ratio assumption that is unchanged from the U.S. Auto Steady-State.  
 
Since the commercial automobile segment is growing at a greater rate than the private passenger 
auto segment, and since commercial automobile has a higher ultimate claim ratio, the actuary 
needs to modify the expected claim ratio assumption. Without such modification, the estimated 
IBNR from both the expected claims and the Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods proves inadequate. 
The reporting and payment patterns also require change. With an increasing proportion of 
commercial automobile, the reporting and payment patterns lengthen, and thus result in the 
requirement for a higher IBNR value. 
 
 
Benktander Technique 
 
An often-cited advantage of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique versus the development 
technique is stability in the presence of sparse data. However, since the estimate of unpaid claims 
for the most recent accident years using the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique is heavily dependant 
on the actuary’s judgment when determining the expected claims, actual claims emergence for 
these years may be ignored to some extent.  
 
The Benktander method, introduced in 1976, is a credibility-weighted average of the Bornhuetter-
Ferguson technique and the development technique. The advantage cited by the authors is that 
this method will prove more responsive than the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique and more stable 
than the development technique. (For further information on the development of the technique 
and underlying proofs of the methodology, see Thomas Mack’s 2000 ASTIN Bulletin paper 
“Credible Claims Reserves: The Benktander Method.”)  
 
The Benktander method is often considered an iterative Bornhuetter-Ferguson method. The only 
difference in the two methods is the derivation of the expected claims. As we discuss in Chapter 8 
– Expected Claims Technique, most insurers use an expected claim ratio and earned premium to 
determine expected claims and many self-insurers use pure premiums and exposures. Such 
expected claims become the input for the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. In the Benktander 
technique, the expected claims are the projected ultimate claims from an initial Bornhuetter-
Ferguson projection – thus, the reference to the Benktander method as an iterative Bornhuetter-
Ferguson method. It is interesting to note that the Benktander projection of ultimate claims will 
approach the projected ultimate claims produced by the development technique after sufficient 
iterations. (See Thomas Mack’s 2000 ASTIN paper for the detailed proof.) 
 
In Exhibits V and VI, we present the Benktander technique using our six examples of changing 
environments. We follow the same exhibit format that was presented earlier in this chapter for the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. The only difference between the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
projections in Exhibits III and IV and the Benktander projections in Exhibits V and VI are the 
expected claims. In the Bornhuetter-Ferguson projections, we derive the expected claims based 
on the initial expected claim ratio multiplied by the earned premium. In the Benktander 
projections, the expected claims are based on the Bornhuetter-Ferguson projections (from 
Exhibits III and IV). 
 
In the following table, we summarize the differences from the true unpaid claims, in thousands of 
dollars, based on the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique and the Benktander technique for the six 
examples related to changing environments. 
160

=== PDF PAGE 167 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
 
 
 
 
Example Name 
Difference from True IBNR ($000) Using 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method Benktander Method 
Reported Paid Reported Paid 
U.S. PP Auto Steady-State 0 0 0 0 
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios 163 443 29 196 
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case  
   Outstanding Strength 
-205 0 -239 0 
U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios  
   and Case Outstanding Strength 
-113 443 -300 196 
U.S. Auto Steady-State 0 0 0 0 
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix 223 400 233 498 
 
The Benktander technique is significantly more responsive to changes in the underlying claim 
ratio but is less responsive to changes in the case outstanding adequacy. The Benktander 
technique is also less responsive to changes in the product mix than the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
technique.  
 
Note that the Benktander method always gives greater credibility to the development technique. 
Thus, where there are no changes in the underlying claim development patterns, we expect the 
Benktander method to be more responsive than the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method. Where claim 
development patterns are changing, the Benktander method may not produce the most appropriate 
estimate as seen in the examples with changing case outstanding adequacy and changes in 
product mix. With the changing product mix, the Benktander method would have proven 
responsive to the changing claim ratio but not to the changes in the underlying development 
patterns. 
 
 
161

=== PDF PAGE 168 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 1
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported and Paid Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Expected CDF to Ultimate Percentage Expected Claims Claims at 12/31/07 Using B-F Method with
Year Claims Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Unreported Unpaid  Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998  51,430,657 1.000 1.002 0.0% 0.2% 0  102,656  47,742,304  47,644,187  47,742,304  47,746,843
1999  51,408,736 1.000 1.004 0.0% 0.4% 0  204,816  51,185,767  51,000,534  51,185,767  51,205,350
2000  51,680,983 1.001 1.006 0.1% 0.6%  51,629  308,236  54,837,929  54,533,225  54,889,558  54,841,461
2001  54,408,716 1.003 1.011 0.3% 1.1%  162,738  591,984  56,299,562  55,878,421  56,462,300  56,470,405
2002  59,421,665 1.006 1.020 0.6% 2.0%  354,404  1,165,131  58,592,712  57,807,215  58,947,116  58,972,346
2003  56,318,302 1.011 1.040 1.1% 3.8%  612,761  2,166,089  57,565,344  55,930,654  58,178,105  58,096,743
2004  59,646,290 1.023 1.085 2.2% 7.8%  1,341,021  4,672,751  56,976,657  53,774,672  58,317,678  58,447,423
2005  61,174,953 1.051 1.184 4.9% 15.5%  2,968,528  9,506,918  56,786,410  50,644,994  59,754,938  60,151,912
2006  61,926,981 1.110 1.404 9.9% 28.8%  6,136,908  17,819,445  54,641,339  43,606,497  60,778,247  61,425,942
2007  61,864,556 1.292 2.390 22.6% 58.2%  13,981,773  35,979,805  48,853,563  27,229,969  62,835,336  63,209,774
Total  569,281,839  25,609,761  72,517,830  543,481,587  498,050,368  569,091,348  570,568,198
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(3) and (4) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(5) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (3))].
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (4))].
(7) = [(2) x (5)].
(8) = [(2) x (6)].
(9) and (10) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(11) = [(7) + (9)].
(12) = [(8) + (10)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_1_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
162

=== PDF PAGE 169 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 2
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/07
Projected Ultimate Claims Case IBNR - Based on  Total - Based on
Accident Claims at 12/31/07 Using B-F Method with Outstanding B-F Method with  B-F Method with
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid at 12/31/07 Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998  47,742,304  47,644,187  47,742,304  47,746,843  98,117 0  4,539  98,117  102,656
1999  51,185,767  51,000,534  51,185,767  51,205,350  185,233 0  19,583  185,233  204,816
2000  54,837,929  54,533,225  54,889,558  54,841,461  304,704  51,629  3,532  356,333  308,236
2001  56,299,562  55,878,421  56,462,300  56,470,405  421,141  162,738  170,843  583,879  591,984
2002  58,592,712  57,807,215  58,947,116  58,972,346  785,497  354,404  379,634  1,139,901  1,165,131
2003  57,565,344  55,930,654  58,178,105  58,096,743  1,634,690  612,761  531,399  2,247,451  2,166,089
2004  56,976,657  53,774,672  58,317,678  58,447,423  3,201,985  1,341,021  1,470,766  4,543,006  4,672,751
2005  56,786,410  50,644,994  59,754,938  60,151,912  6,141,416  2,968,528  3,365,502  9,109,944  9,506,918
2006  54,641,339  43,606,497  60,778,247  61,425,942  11,034,842  6,136,908  6,784,603  17,171,750  17,819,445
2007  48,853,563  27,229,969  62,835,336  63,209,774  21,623,594  13,981,773  14,356,211  35,605,367  35,979,805
Total  543,481,587  498,050,368  569,091,348  570,568,198  45,431,219  25,609,761  27,086,611  71,040,980  72,517,830
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(4) and (5) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 1.
(6) = [(2) - (3)].
(7) = [(4) - (2)].
(8) = [(5) - (2)].
(9) = [(6) + (7)].
(10) = [(6) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_1_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
163

=== PDF PAGE 170 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported and Paid Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Expected CDF to Ultimate Percentage Expected Claims Claims at 12/31/08 Using B-F Method with
Year Claims Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Unreported Unpaid  Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998  15,660 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0% 0  155  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,977
1999  24,665 1.000 1.014 0.0% 1.4% 0  341  25,107  24,817  25,107  25,158
2000  35,235 1.000 1.031 0.0% 3.0% 0  1,059  37,246  36,782  37,246  37,841
2001  39,150 1.000 1.054 0.0% 5.1% 0  2,006  38,798  38,519  38,798  40,525
2002  47,906 1.003 1.116 0.3% 10.4%  143  4,980  48,169  44,437  48,312  49,417
2003  54,164 1.013 1.268 1.3% 21.1%  695  11,448  44,373  39,320  45,068  50,768
2004  86,509 1.064 1.525 6.0% 34.4%  5,204  29,782  70,288  52,811  75,492  82,593
2005  108,172 1.085 2.007 7.8% 50.2%  8,474  54,275  70,655  40,026  79,129  94,301
2006  70,786 1.196 3.160 16.4% 68.4%  11,600  48,386  48,804  22,819  60,404  71,205
2007  39,835 1.512 6.569 33.9% 84.8%  13,489  33,771  31,732  11,865  45,221  45,636
2008  39,433 2.551 21.999 60.8% 95.5%  23,975  37,640  18,632  3,409  42,607  41,049
Total  561,516  63,581  223,842  449,626  330,629  513,207  554,471
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(3) and (4) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheets 1 and 2, capped at a minimum of 1.00.
(5) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (3))].
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (4))].
(7) = [(2) x (5)].
(8) = [(2) x (6)].
(9) and (10) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(11) = [(7) + (9)].
(12) = [(8) + (10)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_2_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
164

=== PDF PAGE 171 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/08
Projected Ultimate Claims Case IBNR - Based on  Total - Based on
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Using B-F Method with Outstanding B-F Method with  B-F Method with
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,977 0 0  155 0  155
1999  25,107  24,817  25,107  25,158  290 0  51  290  341
2000  37,246  36,782  37,246  37,841  465 0  595  465  1,059
2001  38,798  38,519  38,798  40,525  278 0  1,728  278  2,006
2002  48,169  44,437  48,312  49,417  3,731  143  1,248  3,875  4,980
2003  44,373  39,320  45,068  50,768  5,052  695  6,396  5,747  11,448
2004  70,288  52,811  75,492  82,593  17,477  5,204  12,305  22,681  29,782
2005  70,655  40,026  79,129  94,301  30,629  8,474  23,646  39,103  54,275
2006  48,804  22,819  60,404  71,205  25,985  11,600  22,401  37,585  48,386
2007  31,732  11,865  45,221  45,636  19,867  13,489  13,904  33,356  33,771
2008  18,632  3,409  42,607  41,049  15,223  23,975  22,417  39,198  37,640
Total  449,626  330,629  513,207  554,471  118,997  63,581  104,845  182,578  223,842
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(6) = [(2) - (3)].
(7) = [(4) - (2)].
(8) = [(5) - (2)].
(9) = [(6) + (7)].
(10) = [(6) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_2_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
165

=== PDF PAGE 172 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Development Method Expected B-F Method
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,660  15,822  15,977
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  24,665  25,107  25,158
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  35,235  37,246  37,841
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  39,150  38,798  40,525
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  47,906  48,312  49,417
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  54,164  45,068  50,768
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  86,509  75,492  82,593
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  108,172  79,129  94,301
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  70,786  60,404  71,205
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  39,835  45,221  45,636
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  39,433  42,607  41,049
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  561,516  513,207  554,471
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(7) and (8) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_2_3 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
166

=== PDF PAGE 173 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Summary of IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR
Accident Outstanding Development Method Expected B-F Method
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998 0 0  158 - 162 0  155
1999  290 - 25  58 - 442 0  51
2000  465 - 298  676 - 2,011 0  595
2001  278 - 310  1,802  352 0  1,728
2002  3,731  145  1,423 - 262  143  1,248
2003  5,052  577  5,485  9,791  695  6,396
2004  17,477  4,498  10,249  16,221  5,204  12,305
2005  30,629  6,006  9,678  37,517  8,474  23,646
2006  25,985  9,566  23,304  21,982  11,600  22,401
2007  19,867  16,247  46,209  8,103  13,489  13,904
2008  15,223  28,898  56,363  20,801  23,975  22,417
Total  118,997  65,303  155,405  111,890  63,581  104,845
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) and (4) Estimated in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) Estimated in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
(6) and (7) Estimated in Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_2_4 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
167

=== PDF PAGE 174 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 1
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Diff from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Expected Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Expected Percentage Using B-F Method with Using B-F Method with Actual Using B-F Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Claims Reported Paid Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
Steady-State
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  893,397  884,463  857,661 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  893,397  893,397  8,934  8,934  8,934 0  0
2005 48  938,067  919,306  863,022 1.020 1.087 2.0% 8.0%  938,067  938,067  18,761  18,761  18,761 0  0
2006 36  984,970  935,722  827,375 1.053 1.190 5.0% 16.0%  984,970  984,970  49,249  49,249  49,249  0 - 0
2007 24  1,034,219  930,797  734,295 1.111 1.408 10.0% 29.0%  1,034,219  1,034,219  103,422  103,422  103,422  0  0
2008 12  1,085,930  836,166  456,090 1.299 2.381 23.0% 58.0%  1,085,930  1,085,930  249,764  249,764  249,764 0 - 0
Total  8,804,525  8,365,887  7,573,548  8,804,525  8,804,525  438,638  438,638  438,638  0 0
Increasing Claim Ratios
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  893,397  1,010,815  980,184 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  1,019,749  1,015,920  8,934  5,105  10,210  1,276  5,105
2005 48  938,067  1,116,300  1,047,955 1.020 1.087 2.0% 8.0%  1,135,061  1,123,000  18,761  6,700  22,782  4,020  16,081
2006 36  984,970  1,203,071  1,063,768 1.053 1.190 5.0% 16.0%  1,252,319  1,221,363  49,249  18,292  63,320  14,071  45,027
2007 24  1,034,219  1,263,224  996,544 1.111 1.408 10.0% 29.0%  1,366,646  1,296,467  103,422  33,243  140,358  36,936  107,116
2008 12  1,085,930  1,194,523  651,558 1.299 2.381 23.0% 58.0%  1,444,287  1,281,397  249,764  86,874  356,805  107,042  269,931
Total  8,804,525  9,647,366  8,575,112  10,086,004  9,806,090  438,638  158,724  601,984  163,346  443,260
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) See Chapter 8, Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(4) and (5) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 5.
(6) and (7) CDF based on 5-year simple average age-to-age factors presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 5.
(8) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (6))].
(9) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (7))].
(10) = [((3) x (8)) + (4)].
(11) = [((3) x (9)) + (5)].
(12) = [(10) - (4)].
(13) = [(11) - (4)].
(14) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(15) = [(14) - (12)].
(16) = [(14) - (13)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_3_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
168

=== PDF PAGE 175 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 2
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Diff from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Expected Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Expected Percentage Using B-F Method with Using B-F Method with Actual Using B-F Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Claims Reported Paid Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  893,397  884,463  857,661 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  893,397  893,397  8,934  8,934  8,934 0  0
2005 48  938,067  933,377  863,022 1.020 1.087 1.9% 8.0%  951,395  938,067  18,018  4,690  4,690 - 13,328  0
2006 36  984,970  962,808  827,375 1.055 1.190 5.2% 16.0%  1,013,733  984,970  50,925  22,162  22,162 - 28,763 - 0
2007 24  1,034,219  979,922  734,295 1.119 1.408 10.6% 29.0%  1,089,655  1,034,219  109,733  54,296  54,296 - 55,437  0
2008 12  1,085,930  931,185  456,090 1.318 2.381 24.1% 58.0%  1,193,385  1,085,930  262,200  154,745  154,745 - 107,455 - 0
Total  8,804,525  8,551,189  7,573,548  9,009,508  8,804,525  458,319  253,336  253,336 - 204,983 0
Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  893,397  1,010,815  980,184 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  1,019,749  1,015,920  8,934  5,105  10,210  1,276  5,105
2005 48  938,067  1,133,386  1,047,955 1.019 1.087 1.9% 8.0%  1,151,324  1,123,000  17,938 - 10,386  5,695 - 12,243  16,081
2006 36  984,970  1,237,897  1,063,768 1.055 1.190 5.2% 16.0%  1,289,001  1,221,363  51,105 - 16,533  28,494 - 22,611  45,027
2007 24  1,034,219  1,329,895  996,544 1.120 1.408 10.7% 29.0%  1,440,327  1,296,467  110,432 - 33,427  73,688 - 36,744  107,116
2008 12  1,085,930  1,330,264  651,558 1.320 2.381 24.3% 58.0%  1,593,780  1,281,397  263,516 - 48,867  221,064 - 42,452  269,931
Total  8,804,525  9,901,689  8,575,112  10,362,123  9,806,090  460,434 - 95,600  347,660 - 112,773  443,260
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) See Chapter 8, Exhibit IV, Sheet 2.
(4) and (5) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 through 9.
(6) and (7) CDF based on 5-year simple average age-to-age factors presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 through 9.
(8) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (6))].
(9) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (7))].
(10) = [((3) x (8)) + (4)].
(11) = [((3) x (9)) + (5)].
(12) = [(10) - (4)].
(13) = [(11) - (4)].
(14) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(15) = [(14) - (12)].
(16) = [(14) - (13)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_3_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
169

=== PDF PAGE 176 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example
U.S. Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Diff from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Expected Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Expected Percentage Using B-F Method with Using B-F Method with Actual Using B-F Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Claims Reported Paid Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999 120  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,566,600 1.000 1.005 0.0% 0.5%  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  1,653,750  1,653,750  1,628,393 1.000 1.016 0.0% 1.5%  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  1,736,438  1,736,438  1,700,551 1.000 1.021 0.0% 2.1%  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  1,823,259  1,814,751  1,757,622 1.005 1.037 0.5% 3.6%  1,823,259  1,823,259  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,914,422  1,885,068  1,786,794 1.016 1.071 1.5% 6.7%  1,914,422  1,914,422  29,354  29,354  29,354  0 0
2005 48  2,010,143  1,948,499  1,742,124 1.032 1.154 3.1% 13.3%  2,010,143  2,010,143  61,644  61,644  61,644  0  0
2006 36  2,110,651  1,937,577  1,581,581 1.089 1.335 8.2% 25.1%  2,110,651  2,110,651  173,073  173,073  173,073  0 0
2007 24  2,216,183  1,852,729  1,277,999 1.196 1.734 16.4% 42.3%  2,216,183  2,216,183  363,454  363,454  363,454 0  0
2008 12  2,326,992  1,568,393  729,124 1.484 3.191 32.6% 68.7%  2,326,992  2,326,992  758,599  758,599  758,599 0 0
Total  18,866,839  17,472,204  15,270,788  18,866,839  18,866,839  1,394,634  1,394,634  1,394,634  0  0
Changing Product Mix
1999 120  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,566,600 1.000 1.005 0.0% 0.5%  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  1,653,750  1,653,750  1,628,393 1.000 1.016 0.0% 1.5%  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  1,736,438  1,736,438  1,700,551 1.000 1.021 0.0% 2.1%  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  1,823,259  1,814,751  1,757,622 1.005 1.037 0.5% 3.6%  1,823,259  1,823,259  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,914,422  1,885,068  1,786,794 1.016 1.071 1.5% 6.7%  1,914,422  1,914,422  29,354  29,354  29,354  0 0
2005 48  2,249,446  2,193,545  1,951,435 1.032 1.154 3.1% 13.3%  2,262,528  2,251,361  68,983  57,816  71,855  2,872  14,039
2006 36  2,673,012  2,471,446  1,983,482 1.090 1.336 8.3% 25.2%  2,692,025  2,656,353  220,579  184,907  239,057  18,478  54,150
2007 24  3,211,085  2,680,487  1,766,164 1.200 1.750 16.7% 42.9%  3,216,658  3,142,865  536,171  462,378  596,924  60,753  134,547
2008 12  3,897,387  2,556,695  1,097,644 1.503 3.273 33.5% 69.4%  3,860,964  3,804,378  1,304,270  1,247,684  1,445,385  141,115  197,702
Total  22,233,799  20,067,179  16,738,684  22,235,045  22,057,826  2,167,866  1,990,647  2,391,084  223,219  400,438
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) See Chapter 8, Exhibit V.
(4) and (5) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 through 5.
(6) and (7) CDF based on 5-year simple average age-to-age factors presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 through 5.
(8) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (6))].
(9) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (7))].
(10) = [((3) x (8)) + (4)].
(11) = [((3) x (9)) + (5)].
(12) = [(10) - (4)].
(13) = [(11) - (4)].
(14) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(15) = [(14) - (12)].
(16) = [(14) - (13)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_4 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
170

=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit V
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 1
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate Using Gunnar Benktander Method
Age of Expected Ultimate Claims Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Diff from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Using B-F Method with Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Expected Percentage Using G-B Method with Using G-B Method with Actual Using G-B Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17)
Steady-State
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  893,397  893,397  884,463  857,661 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  893,397  893,397  8,934  8,934  8,934 0  0
2005 48  938,067  938,067  919,306  863,022 1.020 1.087 2.0% 8.0%  938,067  938,067  18,761  18,761  18,761 0  0
2006 36  984,970  984,970  935,722  827,375 1.053 1.190 5.0% 16.0%  984,970  984,970  49,249  49,249  49,249  0 - 0
2007 24  1,034,219  1,034,219  930,797  734,295 1.111 1.408 10.0% 29.0%  1,034,219  1,034,219  103,422  103,422  103,422  0  0
2008 12  1,085,930  1,085,930  836,166  456,090 1.299 2.381 23.0% 58.0%  1,085,930  1,085,930  249,764  249,764  249,764 0 - 0
Total  8,804,525  8,804,525  8,365,887  7,573,548  8,804,525  8,804,525  438,638  438,638  438,638  0 - 0
Increasing Claim Ratios
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,019,749  1,015,920  1,010,815  980,184 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  1,021,012  1,020,821  10,197  10,006  10,210  13  204
2005 48  1,135,061  1,123,000  1,116,300  1,047,955 1.020 1.087 2.0% 8.0%  1,139,001  1,137,795  22,701  21,495  22,782  80  1,286
2006 36  1,252,319  1,221,363  1,203,071  1,063,768 1.053 1.190 5.0% 16.0%  1,265,687  1,259,186  62,616  56,115  63,320  704  7,204
2007 24  1,366,646  1,296,467  1,263,224  996,544 1.111 1.408 10.0% 29.0%  1,399,889  1,372,519  136,665  109,295  140,358  3,694  31,064
2008 12  1,444,287  1,281,397  1,194,523  651,558 1.299 2.381 23.0% 58.0%  1,526,709  1,394,768  332,186  200,245  356,805  24,620  156,560
Total  10,086,004  9,806,090  9,647,366  8,575,112  10,220,240  10,053,031  572,874  405,665  601,984  29,110  196,319
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(5) and (6) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 5.
(7) and (8) CDF based on 5-year simple average age-to-age factors presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 through 5.
(9) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (7))].
(10) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (8))].
(11) = [((3) x (9)) + (5)].
(12) = [((4) x (10)) + (6)].
(13) = [(11) - (5)].
(14) = [(12) - (5)].
(15) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(16) = [(15) - (13)].
(17) = [(15) - (14)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_5_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
171

=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit V
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 2
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate Using Gunnar Benktander Method
Age of Expected Ultimate Claims Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Diff from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Using B-F Method with Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Expected Percentage Using G-B Method with Using G-B Method with Actual Using G-B Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17)
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  893,397  893,397  884,463  857,661 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  893,397  893,397  8,934  8,934  8,934 0  0
2005 48  951,395  938,067  933,377  863,022 1.020 1.087 1.9% 8.0%  951,651  938,067  18,274  4,690  4,690 - 13,584  0
2006 36  1,013,733  984,970  962,808  827,375 1.055 1.190 5.2% 16.0%  1,015,221  984,970  52,412  22,162  22,162 - 30,250 - 0
2007 24  1,089,655  1,034,219  979,922  734,295 1.119 1.408 10.6% 29.0%  1,095,537  1,034,219  115,615  54,296  54,296 - 61,319  0
2008 12  1,193,385  1,085,930  931,185  456,090 1.318 2.381 24.1% 58.0%  1,219,330  1,085,930  288,146  154,745  154,745 - 133,401 - 0
Total  9,009,508  8,804,525  8,551,189  7,573,548  9,043,078  8,804,525  491,890  253,336  253,336 - 238,553 - 0
Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999 120  700,000  700,000  700,000  700,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  700,000  700,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  735,000  735,000  735,000  735,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  735,000  735,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  771,750  771,750  771,750  764,033 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  771,750  771,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  810,338  810,338  810,338  802,234 1.000 1.010 0.0% 1.0%  810,338  810,338 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  850,854  850,854  842,346  833,837 1.010 1.020 1.0% 2.0%  850,854  850,854  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,019,749  1,015,920  1,010,815  980,184 1.010 1.042 1.0% 4.0%  1,021,012  1,020,821  10,197  10,006  10,210  13  204
2005 48  1,151,324  1,123,000  1,133,386  1,047,955 1.019 1.087 1.9% 8.0%  1,155,402  1,137,795  22,016  4,409  5,695 - 16,321  1,286
2006 36  1,289,001  1,221,363  1,237,897  1,063,768 1.055 1.190 5.2% 16.0%  1,304,776  1,259,186  66,879  21,289  28,494 - 38,385  7,204
2007 24  1,440,327  1,296,467  1,329,895  996,544 1.120 1.408 10.7% 29.0%  1,483,691  1,372,519  153,796  42,625  73,688 - 80,108  31,064
2008 12  1,593,780  1,281,397  1,330,264  651,558 1.320 2.381 24.3% 58.0%  1,717,017  1,394,768  386,753  64,504  221,064 - 165,689  156,560
Total  10,362,123  9,806,090  9,901,689  8,575,112  10,549,840  10,053,031  648,150  151,342  347,660 - 300,490  196,319
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 2.
(5) and (6) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 through 9.
(7) and (8) CDF based on 5-year simple average age-to-age factors presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 through 9.
(9) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (7))].
(10) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (8))].
(11) = [((3) x (9)) + (5)].
(12) = [((4) x (10)) + (6)].
(13) = [(11) - (5)].
(14) = [(12) - (5)].
(15) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(16) = [(15) - (13)].
(17) = [(15) - (14)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_5_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
172

=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
Chapter 9 - Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique Exhibit VI
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example
U.S. Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate Using Gunnar Benktander Method
Age of Expected Ultimate Claims Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Diff from Actual IBNR
Accident Accident Year Using B-F Method with Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Expected Percentage Using G-B Method with Using G-B Method with Actual Using G-B Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Unreported Unpaid Reported Paid Reported Paid IBNR Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999 120  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,566,600 1.000 1.005 0.0% 0.5%  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  1,653,750  1,653,750  1,653,750  1,628,393 1.000 1.016 0.0% 1.5%  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  1,736,438  1,736,438  1,736,438  1,700,551 1.000 1.021 0.0% 2.1%  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  1,823,259  1,823,259  1,814,751  1,757,622 1.005 1.037 0.5% 3.6%  1,823,259  1,823,259  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,914,422  1,914,422  1,885,068  1,786,794 1.016 1.071 1.5% 6.7%  1,914,422  1,914,422  29,354  29,354  29,354  0 0
2005 48  2,010,143  2,010,143  1,948,499  1,742,124 1.032 1.154 3.1% 13.3%  2,010,143  2,010,143  61,644  61,644  61,644  0  0
2006 36  2,110,651  2,110,651  1,937,577  1,581,581 1.089 1.335 8.2% 25.1%  2,110,651  2,110,651  173,073  173,073  173,073  0 0
2007 24  2,216,183  2,216,183  1,852,729  1,277,999 1.196 1.734 16.4% 42.3%  2,216,183  2,216,183  363,454  363,454  363,454 0  0
2008 12  2,326,992  2,326,992  1,568,393  729,124 1.484 3.191 32.6% 68.7%  2,326,992  2,326,992  758,599  758,599  758,599 - 0 0
Total  18,866,839  18,866,839  17,472,204  15,270,788  18,866,839  18,866,839  1,394,634  1,394,634  1,394,634  0  0
Changing Product Mix
1999 120  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000  1,500,000 1.000 1.000 0.0% 0.0%  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0 0 0
2000 108  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,575,000  1,566,600 1.000 1.005 0.0% 0.5%  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0 0 0
2001 96  1,653,750  1,653,750  1,653,750  1,628,393 1.000 1.016 0.0% 1.5%  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0 0 0
2002 84  1,736,438  1,736,438  1,736,438  1,700,551 1.000 1.021 0.0% 2.1%  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0 0 0
2003 72  1,823,259  1,823,259  1,814,751  1,757,622 1.005 1.037 0.5% 3.6%  1,823,259  1,823,259  8,509  8,509  8,509 0 0
2004 60  1,914,422  1,914,422  1,885,068  1,786,794 1.016 1.071 1.5% 6.7%  1,914,422  1,914,422  29,354  29,354  29,354  0 0
2005 48  2,262,528  2,251,361  2,193,545  1,951,435 1.032 1.154 3.1% 13.3%  2,262,929  2,251,616  69,384  58,071  71,855  2,470  13,784
2006 36  2,692,025  2,656,353  2,471,446  1,983,482 1.090 1.336 8.3% 25.2%  2,693,594  2,652,159  222,148  180,713  239,057  16,909  58,344
2007 24  3,216,658  3,142,865  2,680,487  1,766,164 1.200 1.750 16.7% 42.9%  3,217,588  3,113,616  537,101  433,129  596,924  59,823  163,795
2008 12  3,860,964  3,804,378  2,556,695  1,097,644 1.503 3.273 33.5% 69.4%  3,848,776  3,739,784  1,292,081  1,183,089  1,445,385  153,304  262,296
Total  22,235,045  22,057,826  20,067,179  16,738,684  22,225,757  21,960,044  2,158,578  1,892,866  2,391,084  232,507  498,219
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Developed in Exhibit IV.
(5) and (6) From last diagonal of reported and paid claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 through 5.
(7) and (8) CDF based on 5-year simple average age-to-age factors presented in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 through 5.
(9) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (7))].
(10) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (8))].
(11) = [((3) x (9)) + (5)].
(12) = [((4) x (10)) + (6)].
(13) = [(11) - (5)].
(14) = [(12) - (5)].
(15) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(16) = [(15) - (13)].
(17) = [(15) - (14)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 9_6 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
173

=== PDF PAGE 180 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 – CAPE COD TECHNIQUE 
 
 
The Cape Cod method, also known as the Stanard-Buhlmann method, is similar to the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. As in the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique, the Cape Cod 
method splits ultimate claims into two components: actual reported (or paid) and expected 
unreported (or unpaid). As an accident year (or other time interval) matures, the actual reported 
claims replace the expected unreported claims and the initial expected claims assumption 
becomes gradually less important. The primary difference between the two methods is the 
derivation of the expected claim ratio. In the Cape Cod technique, the expected claim ratio is 
obtained from the reported claims experience instead of an independent and often judgmental 
selection as in the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. 
 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
The key assumption of the Cape Cod method is that unreported claims will develop based on 
expected claims, which are derived using reported (or paid) claims and earned premium. Both the 
Cape Cod and Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods differ from the development method where the 
primary assumption is that unreported claims will develop based on reported claims to date (not 
expected claims). 
 
 
Common Uses of the Cape Cod Technique 
 
Reinsurers are among the most frequent users of the Cape Cod technique. Actuaries generally use 
the Cape Cod method in a reported claims application, but they can also use it with paid claims. 
The technique is appropriate for all lines of insurance including short-tail lines and long-tail lines. 
Similar to the development and Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods, actuaries using the Cape Cod 
method can organize data in a variety of different time intervals: 
 
 Accident year 
 Policy year 
 Underwriting year 
 Report year 
 Fiscal year 
 
Actuaries can also apply this technique with monthly, quarterly, or semiannual data.  
 
 
Mechanics of the Cape Cod Technique 
 
Similar to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique, the Cape Cod method is a blend of two other 
methods: the claim development method and the expected claims method. We restate below the 
formula of the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, which is the same as the Cape Cod 
method: 
 
Ultimate Claims = Actual Reported Claims + Expected Unreported Claims 
 
174

=== PDF PAGE 181 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique 
 
 
Again, the major difference between the Cape Cod technique and the Bornhuetter-Ferguson is the 
source of the expected claims. In “Reinsurance” Patrik states: 
 
The key innovation of the SB (Stanard-Buhlmann) Method is that the ultimate 
expected loss ratio for all years combined is estimated from the overall reported 
claims experience, instead of being selected judgmentally, as in the BF 
(Bornhuetter-Ferguson) Method. A problem with the SB Method is that the IBNR 
by year is highly dependent upon the rate level adjusted premium by year. The 
user must adjust each year’s premium to reflect the rate level cycle on a relative 
basis. But this is also a problem with the BF Method.
58 
 
In our step-by step example of the Cape Cod method, we use the cumulative claim development 
patterns presented in Chapter 7. We begin in Exhibit I, Sheet 1, with the development of the 
estimated claim ratio. In our U.S. Industry Auto example, we do not have details of historical rate 
level changes. Thus, in both the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method and the Cape Cod method, we rely 
on unadjusted earned premium data.  
 
In Column (2) of Exhibit I, Sheet 1, we summarize the unadjusted earned premiums by year. 
Column (3) contains the age of each accident year as of the latest valuation date, December 31, 
2007. The reported claims in Column (4) are the latest diagonal in the reported claim 
development triangle presented in Chapter 7. We also derive the claim development factor to 
ultimate, Column (5), in Chapter 7. In Column (6), we show the reporting pattern. The percentage 
reported is equal to the inverse of the cumulative reported claim development factor.  
 
A new concept of the Cape Cod method is the “used-up premium.” The used-up premium is the 
denominator in our determination of the expected claim ratio. This allocation of premium 
represents the premium corresponding to the claims that are expected to be reported through the 
valuation date. The used-up premium in Column (7) is equal to the earned premium in Column 
(2) multiplied by the percentage of claims reported in Column (6). Reinsurers often use ultimate 
premiums in Column (2) instead of earned premium. In Column (8), we calculate estimated claim 
ratios, by accident year, by dividing actual reported claims from Column (4) by the used-up 
premium in Column (7). (An alternative to the use of premium and claim ratios is exposures and 
pure premiums. Instead of calculating used-up premium, the actuary could calculate used-up 
exposures and calculate estimated pure premiums instead of estimated claim ratios for each year 
in the experience period.) 
 
In our U.S. Industry Auto example, we observe a change in the claim ratios for the latest accident 
years when compared with the earliest years (i.e., 1998 through 2002). The average estimated 
claim ratio for accident years 1998 through 2002 is 75.2%. For this period of time, the claim 
ratios vary from a low of 69.6% to a high of 79.7%. We contrast this with the more recent years’ 
experience, which has an average claim ratio of 64.8%. For each year, 2003 through 2007, the 
estimated claim ratio is less than 67.5%. In the expected claims technique and the Bornhuetter-
Ferguson technique, we rely on different claim ratios for the earlier years and the latest years 
in the experience period to best reflect our expectation of expected claims for each year. In 
contrast, the Cape Cod method requires the use of the weighted average claim ratio from all 
years. Thus, one can distinguish the mechanical approach of developing expected claims in the 
Cape Cod method from the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method in which actuarial judgment plays an 
important role in the development of the a priori expected claim estimate. 
                                                 
58 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001. We refer the reader to “Reinsurance” (Chapter 7) for 
Patrik’s complete development of the formulae underlying the Cape Cod technique. 
175

=== PDF PAGE 182 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique 
 
 
Unpaid Claim Estimate Based on Cape Cod Technique 
 
We follow a similar procedure for determining the unpaid claim estimate based on the Cape Cod 
technique as presented in the prior chapters. Estimated IBNR is equal to projected ultimate claims 
less reported claims and the total unpaid claim estimate is equal to the difference between 
projected ultimate claims and paid claims.  
 
Exhibit I, Sheet 3 displays the calculations for the estimated unpaid claims of U.S. Industry Auto. 
Columns (2) and (3) contain reported and paid claims data as of December 31, 2007. We 
summarize the projected ultimate claims from Exhibit I, Sheet 2 in Column (4). Case outstanding, 
which are equal to the difference between reported claims and paid claims as of December 31, 
2007, are presented in Column (5). Estimated IBNR is equal to projected ultimate claims minus 
reported claims. We calculate the estimated IBNR based on the Cape Cod technique in Column 
(6). The total unpaid claim estimate (Column (7)) is equal to the sum of case outstanding and 
estimated IBNR. 
 
 
When the Cape Cod Technique Works and When it Does Not 
 
Similar comments apply to the Cape Cod method as to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. The 
only difference between the two methods is the derivation of the expected claims. Thus, an 
advantage of the Cape Cod method, when compared to the development technique, is that it may 
not be distorted by random fluctuations early in the development of an accident year (or other 
time interval). A determining factor influencing the fluctuations, in either the Bornhuetter-
Ferguson or Cape Cod methods, is the extent to which actual claims for the most recent years 
affect the derivation of expected claims for such years. 
 
The Cape Cod method is not necessarily as appropriate as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique if 
the data is extremely thin or volatile or both. Since the expected claims are based on reported 
claims to date, there must be a sufficient volume of credible reported claims in order to derive a 
reliable expected claims estimate.  
 
It is worthwhile to note that in an ideal situation, the actuary would have the history of rate level 
changes and would be able to adjust historical premiums to an on-level basis for both the Cape 
Cod and Bornhuetter-Ferguson projections. The actuary would also adjust claims for trend, 
benefit-level changes, and other similar factors. From a theoretical perspective, these methods 
require such adjustment. From a practical perspective, however, such information is often 
unavailable. In these situations, many actuaries continue to use both the Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
and Cape Cod methods for the purpose of developing the unpaid claim estimate without the 
adjustment of premiums or claims. Under such circumstances, it would be prudent for the 
actuary, when evaluating the results of various techniques and selecting final ultimate claims 
values, to take into consideration where simplifying assumptions (such as not adjusting premium 
for rate level changes) were required. 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheets 1 through 3, we use the Cape Cod technique for XYZ Insurer. There are 
weaknesses in this projection technique due to the uncertainty in the selected development 
patterns for reported claims. Due to the numerous changes the insurer has faced, we are uncertain 
176

=== PDF PAGE 183 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique 
 
 
as to the applicability of historical claim development patterns. Since the Cape Cod method uses 
claim development patterns to calculate the used-up premium, which is a critical component in 
the expected claim ratio determination, this method may not be appropriate for this example. 
(Similar to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, we limit the reported cumulative claim 
development factors to a minimum of 1.00 for the Cape Cod technique.) 
 
We have detailed rate change information for XYZ Insurer as well as information regarding the 
effect of legal reform on the insurance product. We incorporate this information into the Cape 
Cod projection method presented in Exhibit II. The first adjustment is to restate earned premium 
for each accident year as if it were at the 2008 rate level. These calculations are contained within 
Columns (2) through (4) of Exhibit II, Sheet 1. In Columns (6) through (9), we adjust the current 
reported claims for the influences of inflation (through claims trend factors) and tort reform. Once 
we have on-level earned premium and adjusted claims, we proceed to calculate estimated claim 
ratios as described in the previous example for U.S. Industry Auto. We divide the adjusted claims 
by used-up, on-level premium to derive the claim ratios shown in Column (13). We use the label 
“Estimated Adjusted Claim Ratios” to indicate that the reported claims are adjusted for inflation 
and tort reform. We rely on the claim ratio for all years combined, 70.8%, from Column (13) 
(also shown in Column (14) for each year) as our starting point for developing estimated 
unadjusted claim ratios in Column (15). These claim ratios, which are adjusted back to the rate 
level, inflationary level, and tort environment for each accident year, become our starting point 
for projecting expected claims in Exhibit II, Sheet 2.  
 
We follow the same format as the example for U.S. Industry Auto in Exhibit II, Sheets 2 and 3. 
We compare the results of the Cape Cod method with the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, the 
expected claims method, and the claim development method in Exhibit II, Sheet 4 (projected 
ultimate claims) and in Exhibit II, Sheet 5 (estimated IBNR). 
 
 
Influence of a Changing Environment on the Cape Cod Method59 
 
In prior chapters, we discuss the performance of each of the estimation techniques during times of 
change. We continue these examples using the Cape Cod method.  
 
 
Scenario 1 – U.S. PP Auto Steady-State 
 
We see in Chapters 7 through 9 that the development technique, expected claims technique, and 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques all generate an accurate IBNR value in a steady-state 
environment. It is not surprising to find that the Cape Cod method also generates the actual IBNR 
in a steady-state environment. The top section of Exhibit III, Sheets 1 and 3, contains detailed 
calculations for the Cape Cod method. 
 
 
                                                 
59 We present the following examples to demonstrate the effect of not changing assumption on the resulting 
projections of ultimate claims and the estimate of unpaid claims. We recognize that the examples are not 
necessarily representative of real-life applications of the Cape Cod method since we assume that there are 
no adjustments in expected claims in anticipation of the events that caused higher claim ratios or changes in 
business mix. Most insurers have a feel for whether a market is getting softer or harder, so they would have 
a sense as to the direction to adjust the expected claims, if not the absolute amount of adjustment.  
177

=== PDF PAGE 184 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique 
 
 
Scenario 2 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios 
 
Recall that the weakness of the expected claims method, which is the lack of responsiveness to 
actual emerging claims, is also a weakness of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method. The Cape Cod 
method, which derives the expected claim ratio based on reported claims through the valuation 
date, does not have this same weakness. In Exhibit III, Sheet 1, we see that the estimated claim 
ratios in Column (8) respond to the changing environment in claims experience. The total all 
years combined estimated claim ratio is 80.7% for this scenario; this compares to the 70% 
expected claim ratio for the steady-state. 
 
In the Bornhuetter-Ferguson reported claim projection, there is no change in the estimated IBNR 
of $438,638 between Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 since the expected claim ratio does not change. 
However, using the Cape Cod method, the estimated IBNR is $505,828 for Scenario 2. While this 
value is still short of the actual IBNR requirements of $601,984, the Cape Cod technique is more 
responsive than the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method when the claim ratios are increasing. 
 
 
Scenario 3 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength 
 
We present the calculations for Scenario 3 in the top section of Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4. In this 
example, we see that the Cape Cod method results in an estimated IBNR that overstates the actual 
IBNR by an even greater amount than the reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. In the 
previous chapters, we discuss how the increase in case outstanding strength leads to an increase in 
the cumulative claim development factors. Whereas the expected claims for Scenario 3 of the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method remain unchanged, the expected claims increase using the Cape 
Cod method because the method reflects the higher level of reported claims. The projected 
ultimate claims are increasing for the Cape Cod method under Scenario 3 due to both increasing 
expected claims and higher claim development factors to ultimate. 
 
 
Scenario 4 – U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength 
 
In times of increasing claim ratios and increasing case outstanding strength, the Cape Cod method 
can overstate the actual IBNR. In this example, the method responds effectively to the change in 
claim ratios, however it overreacts to the change in case outstanding adequacy. In our example, the 
Cape Cod method significantly overstates the actual IBNR needed, indicating that the effect of 
increasing case outstanding strength exceeds the influence of increasing claim ratios. The estimated 
claim ratios are driven higher than their true values by the combined effects of both increasing 
claims and greater adequacy in case outstanding. We present the detailed calculations for Scenario 
4 in the bottom section of Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4.  
 
 
U.S. Auto Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix) 
 
In the last two examples, we present projections for a combined portfolio of private passenger and 
commercial automobile. In the top section of Exhibit IV, Sheets 1 and 2, we summarize the 
calculations for the steady-state environment where there is no change in product mix. Similar to 
our projections using the development and expected claims techniques, we demonstrate in Exhibit 
IV, Sheet 2 that the Cape Cod technique generates the correct IBNR requirement when there is no 
change in the product mix. 
178

=== PDF PAGE 185 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique 
 
 
U.S. Auto Changing Product Mix 
 
In the final example, we assume that the volume of commercial automobile insurance is 
increasing at a greater rate than private passenger automobile insurance. In the bottom section of 
Exhibit IV, Sheet 2, we observe that the Cape Cod method produces estimated IBNR that is lower 
than the actual IBNR. Even though reported claims are increasing in this scenario when compared 
to the prior scenario, there are also changes in the reporting pattern. Thus, the Cape Cod method 
is not responding appropriately to the changing product mix. Detailed calculations are contained 
within the bottom section of Exhibit IV, Sheets 1 and 2. 
179

=== PDF PAGE 186 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 1
Development of Expected Claim Ratio
Age of Reported Reported % of Estimated
Accident Earned Accident Yea r Claims at CDF to Ultimate Used Up Claim
Year Premium at 12/31/07 12/31/07 Ultimate Reported Premium Ratios
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998  68,574,209 120  47,742,304 1.000 100.0%  68,574,209 69.6%
1999  68,544,981 108  51,185,767 1.000 100.0%  68,544,981 74.7%
2000  68,907,977 96  54,837,929 1.001 99.9%  68,839,138 79.7%
2001  72,544,955 84  56,299,562 1.003 99.7%  72,327,971 77.8%
2002  79,228,887 72  58,592,712 1.006 99.4%  78,756,349 74.4%
2003  86,643,542 60  57,565,344 1.011 98.9%  85,700,833 67.2%
2004  91,763,523 48  56,976,657 1.023 97.8%  89,700,413 63.5%
2005  94,115,312 36  56,786,410 1.051 95.1%  89,548,346 63.4%
2006  95,272,279 24  54,641,339 1.110 90.1%  85,830,882 63.7%
2007  95,176,240 12  48,853,563 1.292 77.4%  73,665,820 66.3%
Total 820,771,905  543,481,587   781,488,943   69.5%
Column and Line Notes:
(2) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(3) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2007.
(4) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit I, Sheet 1.
(6) = [1.00 / (5)].
(7) = [(2) x (6)].
(8) = [(4) / (7)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_1_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
180

=== PDF PAGE 187 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 2
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported Claims ($000)
Expected Estimated Reported Expected Reported Projected
Accident Earned Claim Expected CDF to Percentage Unreported Claims at Ultimate
Year Premium Ratio Claims Ultimate Unreported Claims 12/31/07 Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998  68,574,209 69.5%  47,689,504 1.000 0.0% 0  47,742,304  47,742,304
1999  68,544,981 69.5%  47,669,177 1.000 0.0% 0  51,185,767  51,185,767
2000  68,907,977 69.5%  47,921,621 1.001 0.1%  47,874  54,837,929  54,885,803
2001  72,544,955 69.5%  50,450,934 1.003 0.3%  150,900  56,299,562  56,450,462
2002  79,228,887 69.5%  55,099,233 1.006 0.6%  328,624  58,592,712  58,921,336
2003  86,643,542 69.5%  60,255,708 1.011 1.1%  655,601  57,565,344  58,220,945
2004  91,763,523 69.5%  63,816,367 1.023 2.2%  1,434,777  56,976,657  58,411,434
2005  94,115,312 69.5%  65,451,904 1.051 4.9%  3,176,068  56,786,410  59,962,478
2006  95,272,279 69.5%  66,256,509 1.110 9.9%  6,565,960  54,641,339  61,207,299
2007  95,176,240 69.5%  66,189,720 1.292 22.6%  14,959,286  48,853,563  63,812,849
Total  820,771,905  570,800,677  27,319,090  543,481,587  570,800,677
Column Notes:
(2) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(3) Based on total weighted estimated claim ratios developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 1.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit I, Sheet 1.
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (5))].
(7) = [(4) x (6)].
(8) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_1_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
181

=== PDF PAGE 188 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 3
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Case Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Claims at 12/31/07 Ultimate Outstanding Based on Cape Cod Method
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/07 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  47,742,304  47,644,187  47,742,304  98,117 0  98,117
1999  51,185,767  51,000,534  51,185,767  185,233 0  185,233
2000  54,837,929  54,533,225  54,885,803  304,704  47,874  352,578
2001  56,299,562  55,878,421  56,450,462  421,141  150,900  572,041
2002  58,592,712  57,807,215  58,921,336  785,497  328,624  1,114,121
2003  57,565,344  55,930,654  58,220,945  1,634,690  655,601  2,290,291
2004  56,976,657  53,774,672  58,411,434  3,201,985  1,434,777  4,636,762
2005  56,786,410  50,644,994  59,962,478  6,141,416  3,176,068  9,317,484
2006  54,641,339  43,606,497  61,207,299  11,034,842  6,565,960  17,600,802
2007  48,853,563  27,229,969  63,812,849  21,623,594  14,959,286  36,582,880
Total  543,481,587  498,050,368  570,800,677  45,431,219  27,319,090  72,750,309
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(4) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 2.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(5) + (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_1_3 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
182

=== PDF PAGE 189 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Development of Expected Claim Ratio
On-Level Age of Reported Pure Tort Adjusted Reported % of Used Up Claim Ratios
Accident Earned On-Level Earned Accident Year Claims at Premium Reform Claims at CDF to Ultimate On-Level Estimated Selected Estimated
Year Premium Adjustment Premium at 12/31/08 12/31/08 Trend Factors 12/31/08 Ultimate Reported Premium Adjusted Adjusted Unadjusted
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15)
1998  20,000  0.989  19,783 132  15,822  1.400  0.670  14,846 1.000 100.0%  19,783 75.0% 70.8% 74.6%
1999  31,500  0.970  30,548 120  25,107  1.354  0.670  22,777 1.000 100.0%  30,548 74.6% 70.8% 75.7%
2000  45,000  0.951  42,784 108  37,246  1.309  0.670  32,671 1.000 100.0%  42,784 76.4% 70.8% 76.7%
2001  50,000  0.932  46,606 96  38,798  1.266  0.670  32,905 1.000 100.0%  46,606 70.6% 70.8% 77.8%
2002  61,183  0.914  55,911 84  48,169  1.224  0.670  39,500 1.003 99.7%  55,744 70.9% 70.8% 78.9%
2003  69,175  0.870  60,204 72  44,373  1.183  0.670  35,182 1.013 98.7%  59,432 59.2% 70.8% 77.7%
2004  99,322  0.810  80,411 60  70,288  1.144  0.670  53,884 1.064 94.0%  75,574 71.3% 70.8% 74.7%
2005  138,151  0.704  97,258 48  70,655  1.106  0.670  52,371 1.085 92.2%  89,639 58.4% 70.8% 67.2%
2006  107,578  0.640  68,850 36  48,804  1.070  0.750  39,153 1.196 83.6%  57,567 68.0% 70.8% 56.5%
2007  62,438  0.800  49,950 24  31,732  1.034  1.000  32,819 1.512 66.1%  33,036 99.3% 70.8% 54.7%
2008  47,797  1.000  47,797 12  18,632  1.000  1.000  18,632 2.551 39.2%  18,737 99.4% 70.8% 70.8%
Total 732,144        600,103         449,626         374,739         529,449         70.8%
Column and Line Notes:
(2) Based on data from insurer.
(3) For 2002 and after, based on Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 2. For 1998-2001, assume a 2% rate change per annum.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(6) Based on data from insurer.
(7) Assume an annual pure premium trend rate of 3.425%.
(8) Based on independent analysis of tort reform.
(9) = [(6) x (7) x (8)].
(10) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 1, in which the CDF are limited to a minimum of 1.00.
(11) = [1.00 / (10)].
(12) = [(4) x (11)].
(13) = [(9) / (12)].
(14) = [Total in (13)].
(15) = [(14) x (3) / (7) / (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_2_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
183

=== PDF PAGE 190 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported Claims ($000)
Expected Estimated Reported Expected Reported Projected
Accident Earned Claim Expected CDF to Percentage Unreported Claims at Ultimate
Year Premium Ratio Claims Ultimate Unreported Claims 12/31/08 Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998  20,000 74.6%  14,924 1.000 0.0% 0  15,822  15,822
1999  31,500 75.7%  23,833 1.000 0.0% 0  25,107  25,107
2000  45,000 76.7%  34,523 1.000 0.0% 0  37,246  37,246
2001  50,000 77.8%  38,895 1.000 0.0% 0  38,798  38,798
2002  61,183 78.9%  48,259 1.003 0.3%  144  48,169  48,313
2003  69,175 77.7%  53,744 1.013 1.3%  690  44,373  45,062
2004  99,322 74.7%  74,241 1.064 6.0%  4,466  70,288  74,754
2005  138,151 67.2%  92,871 1.085 7.8%  7,276  70,655  77,931
2006  107,578 56.5%  60,743 1.196 16.4%  9,955  48,804  58,759
2007  62,438 54.7%  34,184 1.512 33.9%  11,575  31,732  43,307
2008  47,797 70.8%  33,830 2.551 60.8%  20,569  18,632  39,201
Total  732,144  510,046  54,674  449,626  504,300
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) Selected based on estimated claim ratios developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 1, limited to a minimum of 1.00.
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (5))].
(7) = [(4) x (6)].
(8) Based on data from insurer.
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_2_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
184

=== PDF PAGE 191 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Case Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Ultimate Outstanding Based on Cape Cod Method
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822 0 0 0
1999  25,107  24,817  25,107  290 0  290
2000  37,246  36,782  37,246  465 0  465
2001  38,798  38,519  38,798  278 0  278
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  3,731  144  3,876
2003  44,373  39,320  45,062  5,052  690  5,742
2004  70,288  52,811  74,754  17,477  4,466  21,943
2005  70,655  40,026  77,931  30,629  7,276  37,904
2006  48,804  22,819  58,759  25,985  9,955  35,940
2007  31,732  11,865  43,307  19,867  11,575  31,442
2008  18,632  3,409  39,201  15,223  20,569  35,792
Total  449,626  330,629  504,300  118,997  54,674  173,671
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(4) - (3)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_2_3 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
185

=== PDF PAGE 192 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,660  15,822  15,977  15,822
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  24,665  25,107  25,158  25,107
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  35,235  37,246  37,841  37,246
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  39,150  38,798  40,525  38,798
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  47,906  48,312  49,417  48,313
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  54,164  45,068  50,768  45,062
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  86,509  75,492  82,593  74,754
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  108,172  79,129  94,301  77,931
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  70,786  60,404  71,205  58,759
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  39,835  45,221  45,636  43,307
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  39,433  42,607  41,049  39,201
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  561,516  513,207  554,471  504,300
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(7) and (8) Developed in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(9) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_2_4 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
186

=== PDF PAGE 193 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Summary of IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR
Accident Outstanding Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 0 0  158 - 162 0  155 0
1999  290 - 25  58 - 442 0  51 0
2000  465 - 298  676 - 2,011 0  595 0
2001  278 - 310  1,802  352 0  1,728 0
2002  3,731  145  1,423 - 262  143  1,248  144
2003  5,052  577  5,485  9,791  695  6,396  690
2004  17,477  4,498  10,249  16,221  5,204  12,305  4,466
2005  30,629  6,006  9,678  37,517  8,474  23,646  7,276
2006  25,985  9,566  23,304  21,982  11,600  22,401  9,955
2007  19,867  16,247  46,209  8,103  13,489  13,904  11,575
2008  15,223  28,898  56,363  20,801  23,975  22,417  20,569
Total  118,997  65,303  155,405  111,890  63,581  104,845  54,674
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) and (4) Estimated in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) Estimated in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
(6) and (7) Estimated in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(8) Estimated in Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_2_5 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
187

=== PDF PAGE 194 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 1
Scenarios 1 and 2 - Development of Expected Claim Ratio
Age of Reported Reported % of Estimated
Accident Earned Accident Yea r Claims at CDF to Ultimate Used Up Claim
Year Premium at 12/31/08 12/31/08 Ultimate Reported Premium Ratios
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Steady-State
1999  1,000,000 120  700,000 1.000 100.0%  1,000,000 70.0%
2000  1,050,000 108  735,000 1.000 100.0%  1,050,000 70.0%
2001  1,102,500 96  771,750 1.000 100.0%  1,102,500 70.0%
2002  1,157,625 84  810,338 1.000 100.0%  1,157,625 70.0%
2003  1,215,506 72  842,346 1.010 99.0%  1,203,351 70.0%
2004  1,276,282 60  884,463 1.010 99.0%  1,263,519 70.0%
2005  1,340,096 48  919,306 1.020 98.0%  1,313,294 70.0%
2006  1,407,100 36  935,722 1.053 95.0%  1,336,745 70.0%
2007  1,477,455 24  930,797 1.111 90.0%  1,329,710 70.0%
2008  1,551,328 12  836,166 1.299 77.0%  1,194,523 70.0%
Total 12,577,893   8,365,887     11,951,267   70.0%
Increasing Claim Ratios
1999  1,000,000 120  700,000 1.000 100.0%  1,000,000 70.0%
2000  1,050,000 108  735,000 1.000 100.0%  1,050,000 70.0%
2001  1,102,500 96  771,750 1.000 100.0%  1,102,500 70.0%
2002  1,157,625 84  810,338 1.000 100.0%  1,157,625 70.0%
2003  1,215,506 72  842,346 1.010 99.0%  1,203,351 70.0%
2004  1,276,282 60  1,010,815 1.010 99.0%  1,263,519 80.0%
2005  1,340,096 48  1,116,300 1.020 98.0%  1,313,294 85.0%
2006  1,407,100 36  1,203,071 1.053 95.0%  1,336,745 90.0%
2007  1,477,455 24  1,263,224 1.111 90.0%  1,329,710 95.0%
2008  1,551,328 12  1,194,523 1.299 77.0%  1,194,523 100.0%
Total 12,577,893   9,647,366     11,951,267   80.7%
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(4) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4.
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4.
(6) = [1.00 / (5)].
(7) = [(2) x (6)].
(8) = [(4) / (7)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_3_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
188

=== PDF PAGE 195 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 2
Scenarios 3 and 4 - Development of Expected Claim Ratio
Age of Reported Reported % of Estimated
Accident Earned Accident Yea r Claims at CDF to Ultimate Used Up Claim
Year Premium at 12/31/08 12/31/08 Ultimate Reported Premium Ratios
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 120  700,000 1.000 100.0%  1,000,000 70.0%
2000  1,050,000 108  735,000 1.000 100.0%  1,050,000 70.0%
2001  1,102,500 96  771,750 1.000 100.0%  1,102,500 70.0%
2002  1,157,625 84  810,338 1.000 100.0%  1,157,625 70.0%
2003  1,215,506 72  842,346 1.010 99.0%  1,203,351 70.0%
2004  1,276,282 60  884,463 1.010 99.0%  1,263,519 70.0%
2005  1,340,096 48  933,377 1.020 98.1%  1,314,355 71.0%
2006  1,407,100 36  962,808 1.055 94.8%  1,334,350 72.2%
2007  1,477,455 24  979,922 1.119 89.4%  1,320,694 74.2%
2008  1,551,328 12  931,185 1.318 75.9%  1,176,756 79.1%
Total 12,577,893   8,551,189     11,923,151   71.7%
Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 120  700,000 1.000 100.0%  1,000,000 70.0%
2000  1,050,000 108  735,000 1.000 100.0%  1,050,000 70.0%
2001  1,102,500 96  771,750 1.000 100.0%  1,102,500 70.0%
2002  1,157,625 84  810,338 1.000 100.0%  1,157,625 70.0%
2003  1,215,506 72  842,346 1.010 99.0%  1,203,351 70.0%
2004  1,276,282 60  1,010,815 1.010 99.0%  1,263,519 80.0%
2005  1,340,096 48  1,133,386 1.019 98.1%  1,314,470 86.2%
2006  1,407,100 36  1,237,897 1.055 94.8%  1,334,094 92.8%
2007  1,477,455 24  1,329,895 1.120 89.3%  1,319,695 100.8%
2008  1,551,328 12  1,330,264 1.320 75.7%  1,174,877 113.2%
Total 12,577,893   9,901,689     11,920,130   83.1%
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(4) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 8.
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 8.
(6) = [1.00 / (5)].
(7) = [(2) x (6)].
(8) = [(4) / (7)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_3_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
189

=== PDF PAGE 196 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 3
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Expected Estimated Reported Expected Reported Projected Difference
Accident Earned Claim Expected CDF to Percentage Unreported Claims at Ultimate Estimated Actual from
Year Premium Ratio Claims Ultimate Unreported Claims 12/31/08 Claims IBNR IBNR Actual IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Steady-State
1999  1,000,000 70.0%  700,000 1.000 0.0% 0  700,000  700,000 0 0 0
2000  1,050,000 70.0%  735,000 1.000 0.0% 0  735,000  735,000 0 0 0
2001  1,102,500 70.0%  771,750 1.000 0.0% 0  771,750  771,750 0 0 0
2002  1,157,625 70.0%  810,338 1.000 0.0% 0  810,338  810,338 0 0 0
2003  1,215,506 70.0%  850,854 1.010 1.0%  8,509  842,346  850,854  8,509  8,509 0
2004  1,276,282 70.0%  893,397 1.010 1.0%  8,934  884,463  893,397  8,934  8,934 0
2005  1,340,096 70.0%  938,067 1.020 2.0%  18,761  919,306  938,067  18,761  18,761 0
2006  1,407,100 70.0%  984,970 1.053 5.0%  49,249  935,722  984,970  49,249  49,249 0
2007  1,477,455 70.0%  1,034,219 1.111 10.0%  103,422  930,797  1,034,219  103,422  103,422 0
2008  1,551,328 70.0%  1,085,930 1.299 23.0%  249,764  836,166  1,085,930  249,764  249,764 0
Total  12,577,893  8,804,525  438,638  8,365,887  8,804,525  438,638  438,638 0
Increasing Claim Ratios
1999  1,000,000 80.7%  807,225 1.000 0.0% 0  700,000  700,000 0 0 0
2000  1,050,000 80.7%  847,587 1.000 0.0% 0  735,000  735,000 0 0 0
2001  1,102,500 80.7%  889,966 1.000 0.0% 0  771,750  771,750 0 0 0
2002  1,157,625 80.7%  934,464 1.000 0.0% 0  810,338  810,338 0 0 0
2003  1,215,506 80.7%  981,188 1.010 1.0%  9,812  842,346  852,158  9,812  8,509 - 1,303
2004  1,276,282 80.7%  1,030,247 1.010 1.0%  10,302  1,010,815  1,021,117  10,302  10,210 - 92
2005  1,340,096 80.7%  1,081,759 1.020 2.0%  21,635  1,116,300  1,137,935  21,635  22,782  1,146
2006  1,407,100 80.7%  1,135,847 1.053 5.0%  56,792  1,203,071  1,259,863  56,792  63,320  6,527
2007  1,477,455 80.7%  1,192,640 1.111 10.0%  119,264  1,263,224  1,382,488  119,264  140,358  21,094
2008  1,551,328 80.7%  1,252,272 1.299 23.0%  288,022  1,194,523  1,482,545  288,022  356,805  68,783
Total  12,577,893  10,153,194  505,828  9,647,366  10,153,194  505,828  601,984  96,155
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) Selected based on estimated overall claim ratio developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4.
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (5))].
(7) = [(4) x (6)].
(8) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 2 and 4.
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
(10) = [(9) - (8)].
(11) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(12) = [(11) - (10)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_3_3 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
190

=== PDF PAGE 197 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit III
Impact of Changing Conditions Sheet 4
U.S. PP Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Expected Estimated Reported Expected Reported Projected Difference
Accident Earned Claim Expected CDF to Percentage Unreported Claims at Ultimate Estimated Actual from
Year Premium Ratio Claims Ultimate Unreported Claims 12/31/08 Claims IBNR IBNR Actual IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Increasing Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 71.7%  717,192 1.000 0.0% 0  700,000  700,000 0 0 0
2000  1,050,000 71.7%  753,052 1.000 0.0% 0  735,000  735,000 0 0 0
2001  1,102,500 71.7%  790,704 1.000 0.0% 0  771,750  771,750 0 0 0
2002  1,157,625 71.7%  830,239 1.000 0.0% 0  810,338  810,338 0 0 0
2003  1,215,506 71.7%  871,751 1.010 1.0%  8,718  842,346  851,063  8,718  8,509 - 209
2004  1,276,282 71.7%  915,339 1.010 1.0%  9,153  884,463  893,617  9,153  8,934 - 219
2005  1,340,096 71.7%  961,106 1.020 1.9%  18,461  933,377  951,838  18,461  4,690 - 13,771
2006  1,407,100 71.7%  1,009,161 1.055 5.2%  52,176  962,808  1,014,984  52,176  22,162 - 30,014
2007  1,477,455 71.7%  1,059,619 1.119 10.6%  112,428  979,922  1,092,350  112,428  54,296 - 58,132
2008  1,551,328 71.7%  1,112,600 1.318 24.1%  268,640  931,185  1,199,825  268,640  154,745 - 113,895
Total  12,577,893  9,020,764  469,576  8,551,189  9,020,764  469,576  253,336 - 216,240
Increasing Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength
1999  1,000,000 83.1%  830,670 1.000 0.0% 0  700,000  700,000 0 0 0
2000  1,050,000 83.1%  872,203 1.000 0.0% 0  735,000  735,000 0 0 0
2001  1,102,500 83.1%  915,813 1.000 0.0% 0  771,750  771,750 0 0 0
2002  1,157,625 83.1%  961,604 1.000 0.0% 0  810,338  810,338 0 0 0
2003  1,215,506 83.1%  1,009,684 1.010 1.0%  10,097  842,346  852,443  10,097  8,509 - 1,588
2004  1,276,282 83.1%  1,060,168 1.010 1.0%  10,602  1,010,815  1,021,417  10,602  10,210 - 391
2005  1,340,096 83.1%  1,113,177 1.019 1.9%  21,287  1,133,386  1,154,673  21,287  5,695 - 15,591
2006  1,407,100 83.1%  1,168,835 1.055 5.2%  60,644  1,237,897  1,298,541  60,644  28,494 - 32,150
2007  1,477,455 83.1%  1,227,277 1.120 10.7%  131,047  1,329,895  1,460,941  131,047  73,688 - 57,359
2008  1,551,328 83.1%  1,288,641 1.320 24.3%  312,707  1,330,264  1,642,971  312,707  221,064 - 91,642
Total  12,577,893  10,448,073  546,383  9,901,689  10,448,073  546,383  347,660 - 198,721
Column Notes:
(2) Assume $1,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
(3) Selected based on estimated overall claim ratio developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 2.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 8.
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (5))].
(7) = [(4) x (6)].
(8) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 8.
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
(10) = [(9) - (8)].
(11) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(12) = [(11) - (10)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_3_4 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
191

=== PDF PAGE 198 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 1
Scenarios 5 and 6 - Development of Expected Claim Ratio
Age of Reported Reported % of Estimated
Accident Earned Accident Yea r Claims at CDF to Ultimate Used Up Claim
Year Premium at 12/31/08 12/31/08 Ultimate Reported Premium Ratios
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999  2,000,000 120  1,500,000 1.000 100.0%  2,000,000 75.0%
2000  2,100,000 108  1,575,000 1.000 100.0%  2,100,000 75.0%
2001  2,205,000 96  1,653,750 1.000 100.0%  2,205,000 75.0%
2002  2,315,250 84  1,736,438 1.000 100.0%  2,315,250 75.0%
2003  2,431,013 72  1,814,751 1.005 99.5%  2,419,668 75.0%
2004  2,552,563 60  1,885,068 1.016 98.5%  2,513,424 75.0%
2005  2,680,191 48  1,948,499 1.032 96.9%  2,597,999 75.0%
2006  2,814,201 36  1,937,577 1.089 91.8%  2,583,436 75.0%
2007  2,954,911 24  1,852,729 1.196 83.6%  2,470,306 75.0%
2008  3,102,656 12  1,568,393 1.484 67.4%  2,091,190 75.0%
Total 25,155,785  17,472,204   23,296,273   75.0%
Changing Product Mix
1999  2,000,000 120  1,500,000 1.000 100.0%  2,000,000 75.0%
2000  2,100,000 108  1,575,000 1.000 100.0%  2,100,000 75.0%
2001  2,205,000 96  1,653,750 1.000 100.0%  2,205,000 75.0%
2002  2,315,250 84  1,736,438 1.000 100.0%  2,315,250 75.0%
2003  2,431,013 72  1,814,751 1.005 99.5%  2,419,668 75.0%
2004  2,552,563 60  1,885,068 1.016 98.5%  2,513,424 75.0%
2005  2,999,262 48  2,193,545 1.032 96.9%  2,907,284 75.4%
2006  3,564,016 36  2,471,446 1.090 91.7%  3,269,911 75.6%
2007  4,281,446 24  2,680,487 1.200 83.3%  3,566,552 75.2%
2008  5,196,516 12  2,556,695 1.503 66.5%  3,457,489 73.9%
Total 29,645,066  20,067,179   26,754,578   75.0%
Column and Line Notes:
(2) For no change scenario, assume $2,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5%
   annual increase thereafter. For change scenario, assume annual increase of 30% for commercial
   auto beginning in 2005.
(3) Age of accident year at December 31, 2008.
(4) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 4.
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 4.
(6) = [1.00 / (5)].
(7) = [(2) x (6)].
(8) = [(4) / (7)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_4_1 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
192

=== PDF PAGE 199 ===
Chapter 10 - Cape Cod Technique Exhibit IV
Impact of Change in Product Mix Example Sheet 2
U.S. Auto - Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Expected Estimated Reported Expected Reported Projected Difference
Accident Earned Claim Expected CDF to Percentage Unreported Claims at Ultimate Estimated Actual from
Year Premium Ratio Claims Ultimate Unreported Claims 12/31/08 Claims IBNR IBNR Actual IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Steady-State (No Change in Product Mix)
1999  2,000,000 75.0%  1,500,000 1.000 0.0% 0  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0
2000  2,100,000 75.0%  1,575,000 1.000 0.0% 0  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0
2001  2,205,000 75.0%  1,653,750 1.000 0.0% 0  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0
2002  2,315,250 75.0%  1,736,438 1.000 0.0% 0  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0
2003  2,431,013 75.0%  1,823,259 1.005 0.5%  8,509  1,814,751  1,823,259  8,509  8,509 0
2004  2,552,563 75.0%  1,914,422 1.016 1.5%  29,354  1,885,068  1,914,422  29,354  29,354 0
2005  2,680,191 75.0%  2,010,143 1.032 3.1%  61,644  1,948,499  2,010,143  61,644  61,644 0
2006  2,814,201 75.0%  2,110,651 1.089 8.2%  173,073  1,937,577  2,110,651  173,073  173,073 0
2007  2,954,911 75.0%  2,216,183 1.196 16.4%  363,454  1,852,729  2,216,183  363,454  363,454 0
2008  3,102,656 75.0%  2,326,992 1.484 32.6%  758,599  1,568,393  2,326,992  758,599  758,599 0
Total  25,155,785  18,866,839  1,394,634  17,472,204  18,866,839  1,394,634  1,394,634 0
Changing Product Mix
1999  2,000,000 75.0%  1,500,093 1.000 0.0% 0  1,500,000  1,500,000 0 0 0
2000  2,100,000 75.0%  1,575,098 1.000 0.0% 0  1,575,000  1,575,000 0 0 0
2001  2,205,000 75.0%  1,653,853 1.000 0.0% 0  1,653,750  1,653,750 0 0 0
2002  2,315,250 75.0%  1,736,545 1.000 0.0% 0  1,736,438  1,736,438 0 0 0
2003  2,431,013 75.0%  1,823,373 1.005 0.5%  8,509  1,814,751  1,823,260  8,509  8,509 - 1
2004  2,552,563 75.0%  1,914,541 1.016 1.5%  29,356  1,885,068  1,914,424  29,356  29,354 - 2
2005  2,999,262 75.0%  2,249,586 1.032 3.1%  68,987  2,193,545  2,262,532  68,987  71,855  2,867
2006  3,564,016 75.0%  2,673,178 1.090 8.3%  220,593  2,471,446  2,692,039  220,593  239,057  18,464
2007  4,281,446 75.0%  3,211,284 1.200 16.7%  536,204  2,680,487  3,216,691  536,204  596,924  60,720
2008  5,196,516 75.0%  3,897,629 1.503 33.5%  1,304,351  2,556,695  3,861,045  1,304,351  1,445,385  141,035
Total  29,645,066  22,235,179  2,168,000  20,067,179  22,235,179  2,168,000  2,391,084  223,083
Column Notes:
(2) For no change scenario, assume $2,000,000 for first year in experience period (1999) and 5% annual increase thereafter.
   For change scenario, assume annual increase of 30% for commercial auto beginning in 2005.
(3) Selected based on estimated overall claim ratios developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 4.
(6) = [1.00 - (1.00 / (5))].
(7) = [(4) x (6)].
(8) From last diagonal of reported claim triangles in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheets 2 and 4.
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
(10) = [(9) - (8)].
(11) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(12) = [(11) - (10)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 10_4_2 04/03/2009 - 2:58 PM
193

=== PDF PAGE 200 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
CHAPTER 11 – FREQUENCY-SEVERITY TECHNIQUES 
 
 
Projections based on frequency-severity techniques can be extremely valuable, not only in 
providing additional estimates of unpaid claims, but also in understanding the drivers in claims 
activity. In the paper “Evaluating Bodily Injury Liabilities Using a Claims Closure Model,” 
Martin Adler and Charles D. Kline discuss the rhythm in the claims settlement process: 
 
Claims emerge at an identifiable rate, they are settled at an identifiable rate, the 
payments grow at an identifiable rate and the accuracy of individual case 
estimates improves at an identifiable rate.
60 
 
When actuaries use frequency-severity techniques in their simplest form, they project ultimate 
claims by multiplying the estimated ultimate number of claims (i.e., frequency) by the estimated 
ultimate average value (i.e., severity). By analyzing claims experience by its frequency and 
severity components, actuaries are able to examine trends and patterns in the rates of claims 
emergence (i.e., reporting) and settlement (i.e., closure) as well as in the average values of claims. 
This can be particularly valuable when an organization is undergoing change in operations, 
philosophy, or management. Frequency-severity methods can also be important to validate or 
reject the findings from other actuarial projection techniques. 
 
 
Common Uses of Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
Actuaries can use frequency-severity techniques for projecting unpaid claim estimates in a wide 
variety of situations. They can use them with accident year, policy year, report year, and calendar 
year data. Generally reinsurers do not use frequency-severity methods with underwriting year 
data simply because they do not have access to detailed statistics regarding the number of claims. 
Frequency-severity techniques are appropriate for all lines of insurance but are more often used 
for long-tail lines. Furthermore, actuaries can use frequency-severity methods for projecting 
unpaid claims for both primary layers of coverage and excess layers of insurance. 
 
Technically, frequency refers to the number of claims per unit of exposure, and severity refers to 
the average cost per claim. Thus, for a true frequency-severity projection method, the actuary 
would require historical data for the claims, number of claims, and exposures. In practice, many 
actuaries use the term “frequency-severity methods” to refer to projections of ultimate claim 
counts multiplied by ultimate severities without the direct incorporation of an exposure 
measurement. 
 
 
Types of Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
There are many different types of projection methods that fall under the classification of 
frequency-severity techniques. In this chapter, we examine three different types of frequency-
severity projection methods. Since the number of claims is not available from our source of the 
consolidated industry data in the U.S., which is Best’s Aggregates & Averages, we are not able to 
carry forward most of the examples contained in the preceding chapters. We do, however, 
continue with our example for XYZ Insurer.  
                                                 
60 CAS Discussion Paper Program, 1988. 
194

=== PDF PAGE 201 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
The first and simplest frequency-severity approach is the development technique applied 
separately to claim counts and average values. We present this approach in Exhibit I for a 
Canadian portfolio of private passenger automobile collision coverage (Auto Collision Insurer) 
and in Exhibit II for XYZ Insurer. 
 
In the second frequency-severity approach, we focus on projecting ultimate claims for the most 
recent two accident years. The development method can often result in substantial development 
factors to ultimate for the most recent accident years. Highly leveraged factors typically lead to 
greater uncertainty in actuarial projections of ultimate claims; this, in turn, results in greater 
uncertainty for the estimate of unpaid claims. It is important for actuaries to consider alternative 
projection techniques in such situations. The expected claims and Bornhuetter-Ferguson 
techniques are two of the most commonly used methods to supplement claim development 
methods, particularly for the most recent accident years. Frequency-severity methods are also a 
valuable alternative for the actuary. 
 
In the second frequency-severity approach, we compare, by accident year, the projected ultimate 
number of claims to an exposure base. The selected frequency rate (i.e., ultimate number of 
claims per exposure unit) is then used to project the ultimate number of claims for the most recent 
two accident years. The severities for the most recent accident years are based on the 
development technique applied to reported severities after adjustment for inflation. We use this 
approach in Exhibit III for a self-insurer of U.S. workers compensation (WC Self-Insurer) and in 
Exhibit IV for XYZ Insurer. 
 
Our third frequency-severity approach is based on a disposal rate analysis. This final approach 
builds upon the basic development triangle used with both claims and claim counts. In this 
method, we examine the rate of claim count closure at each maturity age and the incremental paid 
severity by maturity age. In Exhibit V, we present an example of this approach for a portfolio of 
general liability insurance (GL Insurer) and in Exhibit VI for XYZ Insurer. 
 
In the following sections, we describe each of the three frequency-severity approaches in detail 
including the key assumptions and the mechanics of each technique.  
 
 
Frequency-Severity Approach #1 – Development Technique with Claim 
Counts and Severities 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
Two of the major requirements of frequency-severity techniques are that the individual claim 
counts being grouped are defined in a consistent manner over the experience period and that the 
claim counts are reasonably homogenous. For example, it is not appropriate to group together 
claimant counts and occurrence counts, which record all claimants under the occurrence as a 
single claim, unless the mix of the two ways of counting a claim is consistent. It is also important 
that the type of claim be reasonably homogenous. For example, it is not reasonable to combine 
the average values for slip-and-fall claims with those resulting from class action proceedings in 
which thousands of injured parties are grouped together; such average values would have little 
meaning. Likewise, it is not appropriate to analyze first-dollar, low-limit claims with high-layer, 
multi-million dollar, excess claims. 
 
195

=== PDF PAGE 202 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
As indicated previously, many frequency-severity methods rely on the development technique 
applied separately to claim counts and average values. Thus, a key assumption of the 
development technique is also applicable to this type of frequency-severity analysis. Recall that 
the underlying assumption in the development technique is that claims reported (or paid) to date 
will continue to develop in a similar manner in the future. In a frequency-severity method where 
reported (or closed) claim counts are used to project the ultimate number of claims, the actuary 
assumes that the claim counts reported (or closed) to date will continue to develop in a similar 
manner in the future. Similarly, the actuary using the development technique on severities 
assumes that the relative change in a given year’s severities from one evaluation point to the next 
is similar to the relative change in prior years’ severities at similar evaluation points. 
 
 
Mechanics of the Technique 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 1 through 8, we present our first frequency-severity example for Auto 
Collision Insurer. This first example has four basic steps: 
 
 Project and select ultimate claim counts 
 Project ultimate severity 
 Project ultimate claims 
 Develop unpaid claim estimate 
 
In this example, we use semi-annual accident periods and valuations in intervals of six months.
61 
 
 
Project and Select Ultimate Claim Counts  
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 1 through 3, we use the development technique to project both closed and 
reported claim counts to an ultimate basis. (We describe the development technique in detail in 
Chapter 7 – Development Technique.) For Auto Collision Insurer, the closed claim counts 
include claim counts closed with payments or claim-related expense payments or both, but do not 
include claim counts closed with no payment (CNP). Reported claim counts include the number 
of closed claims in addition to the number of open claims with a case outstanding (for claim only 
or claim-related expense) greater than $0.  
 
Since the reported claim counts in this example exclude CNP counts, it is not surprising to 
observe negative (or downward) development (i.e., age-to-age factors of less than 1.00) in Exhibit 
I, Sheet 2. Recall that private passenger collision is a very fast reporting and settling coverage of 
automobile insurance. In our example, the reported claim counts at six months include many open 
claims with case outstanding values. However, as time passes and these claims mature, many will 
close without any payment. Due to the fast-reporting nature of this coverage, for a particular 
accident half-year, there are more claim counts closed without payment in subsequent valuations 
than new claim counts reported. Thus, we see age-to-age factors of less than 1.00 for every 
accident half-year at 6-to-12 months. Similar behavior is evident through 36 months for the 
reported claim count triangle of age-to-age factors. 
 
                                                 
61 We present this example using data at six-month evaluations for two reasons. First, to demonstrate to the 
reader that the estimation of unpaid claims is often conducted using data at valuations other than 12-month 
intervals. Second, this example demonstrates the potential influence of seasonality on claim development 
factors. 
196

=== PDF PAGE 203 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
We again stress the importance of understanding the type of data provided by the insurer. If the 
closed counts exclude CNP counts but reported counts include the CNP counts, the actuary will 
not be able to use both the closed and reported counts to produce comparable estimates of the 
ultimate number of claims. If claims include all claim adjustment expense (with or without claim 
payments or case outstanding) but counts do not include claims with claim adjustment expense 
only, there will not be an appropriate match of the number of claims and the dollars that are spent 
on the claims. Another important issue related to the number of claims is claimant count versus 
occurrence count. A single occurrence, such as an automobile accident may result in multiple 
injured parties or damaged vehicles or both. Does the insurer record one count or multiple counts 
for such an occurrence? The actuary must understand how the insurer defines and records claim 
counts and whether or not there have been changes in the insurer’s practices during the 
experience period. There may also be different practices with respect to recording claim counts 
on the insurer’s systems when the payment is below the deductible. As we note continually 
through this book, the important point is that the actuary must understand the data that he or she 
is working with. 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, we present the development triangles for closed and reported claim 
counts, respectively. We judgmentally select age-to-age factors based on the simple average for 
the latest three half-years for both closed and reported counts. At first glance, we note that there is 
variability from accident half-year to accident half-year at 6-to-12 months for the closed claim 
counts, but the averages appear relatively close to one another. We will further investigate this 
particular age-to-age maturity (6-to-12 months) later in this example. 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 3, we project the ultimate number of claims by accident half-year. Note, that 
accident half-year 2008-1, which represents the period from January 1, 2008 through June 30, 
2008, is six months old as of June 30, 2008; and accident half-year 2007-2, which represents the 
period from July 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007, is 12 months old at June 30, 2008. (We begin 
counting with the beginning of the accident half-year period.)  
 
Exhibit I, Sheet 3, where we project the claim counts to ultimate, is similar to the development 
projections contained in preceding chapters. We present the age of the accident half-year in 
Column (2) of Exhibit I, Sheet 3. Columns (3) and (4) show closed and reported claim counts, 
respectively, as of June 30, 2008. The next two columns are the development factors to ultimate. 
The projected ultimate claim counts based on closed counts are shown in Column (7), and the 
projected ultimate claim counts based on the reported counts are in Column (8). It is obvious after 
a quick examination of Columns (7) and (8) that the two projection methods produce similar 
results for all accident half-years except for the latest period (i.e., 2008-1). 
 
We now return to the claim count triangles to determine if there is something taking place that we 
missed upon our first review. One quick way to look for changes or patterns in the triangular data 
is to use a development diagnostic. In Exhibit I, Sheet 4, we present the ratio of closed-to-
reported claim counts. Looking down the column at age six months, we immediately see evidence 
of seasonality in the relationship between closed and reported counts. For accident half-years 
ending with a 2 (i.e., July 1 through December 31), the average ratio of closed-to-reported counts 
is 0.71, and there is minimal variability from period to period around this average. Similarly, 
there is minimal variability in the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts for accident half-years 
ending with a 1 (i.e., January 1 to June 30); they have an average ratio of 0.81.  
 
There are numerous factors that could result in a lower proportion of claim counts closed at six 
months for the accident half-years ending December 31 than for those ending June 30. For 
example, there may be a higher number of claims reported in Canada in November and December 
197

=== PDF PAGE 204 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
due to the beginning of winter weather and the resulting more hazardous driving conditions. 
There is also less time to settle the November and December winter claims with a December 31 
closing date than the winter claims occurring in January and February with a half-year closing 
date of June 30. There may also be less time available to process and close the November and 
December claims due to the shorter work period for many companies that close over the 
Christmas holidays. The actuary should speak to claims department management to understand 
the reasons for such patterns in the data. We also observe that there are no material differences or 
patterns evident in any maturities beyond six months. 
 
Since we observe a distinctive pattern in the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts at six 
months, the next step is to see if we can discern any patterns in either the closed count triangle or 
the reported count triangle or both. Upon a second examination of the age-to-age factors for 
closed claim counts (Part 2 of Exhibit I, Sheet 1), we note differences in the age-to-age factors for 
accident half-years ending June versus December. We do not see obvious patterns in the reported 
claim count triangle at the 6-to-12 month interval. In the table below we summarize the 6-to-12 
month factors for both closed and reported counts. We also present the simple averages for all 
years and the latest three years. 
 
 Age-to-Age Factors at 6-12 Months 
 
Accident Half-Year 
Closed Claim 
Counts 
Reported Claim 
Counts 
2003-2 1.281 0.932 
2004-1 1.153 0.934 
2004-2 1.275 0.910 
2005-1 1.154 0.956 
2005-2 1.327 0.942 
2006-1 1.181 0.966 
2006-2 1.353 0.956 
2007-1 1.212 0.983 
2007-2 1.312 0.995 
   
Accident Half-Years – 1   
Simple Average All Years 1.175 0.960 
Simple Average Latest 3 Years 1.183 0.968 
   
Accident Half-Years – 2   
Simple Average All Years 1.310 0.947 
Simple Average Latest 3 Years 1.331 0.964 
 
Now that we are aware of the difference in 6-to-12 month development factors for closed claim 
counts, we revise our selected age-to-age factor from 1.292, which is the simple average of the 
latest three accident half-years, to 1.183, which is the simple average latest three accident half-
years ending at June 30. We choose the factors based on accident half-years ending June because 
the latest point in our six-month data ends June 30. Since we do not notice any material 
differences in the development factors for reported claim counts, we do not change our original 
selected factor.  
198

=== PDF PAGE 205 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
The new projected ultimate claim counts for accident half-year 2008-1 based on closed counts 
are: 
 
  [(closed claim counts at June 30, 2008) x (development factor to ultimate)] = 
 
  [(2,533) x (1.001 x 1.009 x 1.183)] = [(2,533) x (1.195)] = 3,027 
 
The projected number of ultimate claims based on reported claim counts for accident half-year 
2008-1 is 3,061; this is very close to our new projected value of 3,027, which is based on closed 
claim counts. 
 
 
Project Ultimate Severity 
 
The development technique is also used to project reported severities to an ultimate basis. In 
Exhibit I, Sheet 5, we summarize the triangles of reported claims (in thousands of dollars) and 
reported severities (i.e., average reported claim). We analyze the reported severity triangle and 
select development factors in Exhibit I, Sheet 6. Since we note some seasonality in the claim 
count triangle, we also check for seasonality differences between the half-years in the triangle of 
reported severities. There does appear to be greater development for accident half-years ending 
December rather than June, particularly for the older periods in the triangle. In such a situation, 
the actuary should seek further explanation from claims management professionals to fully 
understand the factors influencing the claim development patterns. In our example, we select a 6-
to-12 month factor of 1.039 based on the medial average (i.e., average excluding high and low 
values) and the assumption that the experience of the most recent few years is more 
representative of future experience than the earliest periods in the triangle. We also use the medial 
average to select the age-to-age factors for the remaining maturities. 
 
 
Project Ultimate Claims 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 7, we multiply the projected ultimate severities by the projected ultimate claim 
counts to determine the projected ultimate claims by accident half-year period. 
 
 
Develop Unpaid Claim Estimate 
 
The steps involved in the calculation of the unpaid claim estimate are similar to all the previous 
methods presented. Estimated IBNR is equal to the difference between projected ultimate claims 
and reported claims. For Auto Collision Insurer, the estimated IBNR is negative for all accident 
half-years except the latest period, 2008-1. Negative IBNR is often a result of either salvage and 
subrogation recoveries, which are included with the claim development data, or a conservative 
philosophy towards setting case outstanding. In this particular example, the negative IBNR is a 
result of the downward (i.e., favorable) development of claim counts and not salvage or 
subrogation recoveries. The total unpaid claim estimate is equal to the sum of case outstanding 
and estimated IBNR and is shown in Column (6) of Exhibit I, Sheet 8.  
 
 
199

=== PDF PAGE 206 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Analysis for XYZ Insurer 
 
In Exhibit II, we use the same frequency-severity approach for XYZ Insurer. This example has 
been addressed in each of the preceding chapters of Part 3. We know, based on interviews with 
management of XYZ Insurer and reviews of the diagnostic development triangles, that there have 
been significant changes in both their internal and external environments. (It may be valuable to 
review the diagnostic triangles presented in Chapter 6 for XYZ Insurer.) The only adjustment we 
make to the severity methodology to reflect these recent changes is in our selection of the 
development factors. We select the volume-weighted average of the age-to-age factors for the 
latest two years; we use the latest two years in an attempt to reflect the most recent operating 
environment at XYZ Insurer. 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 3, we project the ultimate number of claims based on closed and reported 
claim counts. While the two projections of claim counts are somewhat close for accident years 
1998 through 2005, we observe significant differences in the projected number of ultimate claims 
for 2006 through 2008. For every year starting in 2000 through 2008, the ultimate count 
projections based on closed counts are greater than the ultimate projections based on reported 
counts. 
 
Similar to the previous collision example, the next step is to project the ultimate severities by 
accident year. We analyze the triangle of reported severities in Exhibit II, Sheet 5. We observe 
that within the triangle of age-to-age factors, the latest point in each column is usually the lowest 
point in the column. This is consistent with management’s assertion that there has been a 
significant increase in case outstanding strength, particularly in calendar year 2007. Again, we 
use the latest two years for our selected development factors in an attempt to best reflect the 
current environment at this insurer. 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 6, we multiply the projected ultimate severities by the projected number of 
ultimate claims for each accident year to project ultimate claims. We calculate estimated IBNR 
and the total unpaid claim estimate in Exhibit II, Sheet 7. 
 
We observe that the estimated IBNR and total unpaid claim estimate from this type of frequency-
severity projection are higher than the estimated unpaid claims generated from the reported claim 
development technique and lower than the estimate generated from the paid claim development 
technique. At XYZ Insurer, we know that there have been changes in case outstanding adequacy 
and claims settlement procedures. Without appropriate adjustment to our projection techniques, 
either in the types of data that are used or the methodological adjustments, we may exacerbate 
problems in our projected results. For an example, return to the projected number of ultimate 
claims in Exhibit II, Sheet 3. Projected ultimate claim counts based on closed counts are 
significantly greater than projected ultimate claim counts based on reported counts. This is 
consistent with our conclusions regarding an increased rate of claims settlement. Thus, it may be 
more appropriate to rely on the reported claim count projection which is not affected by changes 
in claims closure patterns. This change alone reduces the estimated IBNR by more than $30 
million. 
 
 
200

=== PDF PAGE 207 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Frequency-Severity Approach #2 – Incorporation of Exposures and Inflation into 
the Methodology 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
This second frequency-severity approach also relies on the development technique applied to 
historical closed and reported claim counts and average reported claims. Thus, critical 
assumptions include:  
 
 Claim counts and reported claim activity to date will continue to develop in a similar 
manner in the future 
 
 Claim counts are defined consistently over time 
 
 The mix by claim type is reasonably consistent (to the extent that the potential claims 
can vary significantly by type of claim) 
 
In this second approach, however, we also incorporate trend rates into the analysis of both 
frequency and severity parameters. In our examples, we examine three specific trend rates: 
exposure trend, frequency trend, and severity trend.  
 
When selecting trend rates, there are numerous considerations for the actuary. The selection of 
frequency and severity trends often reflects not only economic inflationary factors but also 
societal factors that tend to increase both the number and the size of claims over time. Trend rates 
typically vary by line of business and even by subcoverage within a line of business. In addition, 
there can be significant variation in trend rates for exposures, frequency, and severity by 
geographic region (e.g., country, state/province within a country, and even subdivisions within a 
state/province). Severity and frequency trend rates can also vary based on the limits (i.e., 
retention) carried by the insurer or self-insurer. For U.S. workers compensation, it is often 
appropriate to incorporate adjustments for statutory benefit changes into the analysis as well as 
inflationary trend factors. 
 
There are various sources actuaries turn to when selecting trend assumptions, including general 
insurance industry data, government statistical organizations, economic indices, and insurer-
specific experience. Later in this chapter, we present examples in which regression analysis of the 
insurer’s own claims experience is used to determine trend rates. The accuracy and appropriateness 
of the assumed trend rates is critical for many frequency-severity methods that are used to project 
ultimate claims.
62 The longer the projection period, the greater the uncertainty as trend factors can 
become very large and thus highly leveraged.  
 
 
                                                 
62 For example, there have been times when the inflation rate for many of the items covered by U.S. auto 
insurance was positive, but the observed average claim severity trend was negative. Two possible reasons 
for this disparity of inflation rates include a change in the mix of claim types and the impact of various 
safety features added to new cars. 
201

=== PDF PAGE 208 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Mechanics of the Approach 
 
In our second frequency-severity approach, we use historical claim counts and severities to project 
ultimate claims for the latest two accident years. We present two examples: a self-insurer of U.S. 
workers compensation (WC Self-Insurer) and XYZ Insurer. As we discuss previously, the claim 
development factor to ultimate can be highly leveraged for the most recent accident years, which 
can lead to a greater degree of uncertainty in the estimate of unpaid claims. Therefore, actuaries can 
turn to this type of frequency-severity approach as an alternative method for projecting ultimate 
claims.  
 
This second approach to frequency-severity has five basic steps: 
 
 Project and select ultimate claim counts 
 Compare ultimate claim counts to exposures and select frequency 
 Project ultimate severity 
 Project ultimate claims 
 Develop unpaid claim estimate 
 
 
Project and Select Ultimate Claim Counts 
 
Similar to our examples based on approach #1, we begin with projecting both closed and reported 
claim counts to an ultimate basis and selecting the ultimate claim counts by accident year (Exhibit 
III, Sheets 1 through 3).  In this example, we select development factors based on the volume-
weighted average for the latest five years. For the oldest maturity periods in the closed claim 
count triangle (84-to-96 months), we judgmentally select a development factor of 1.003, which 
results in a smoother pattern than the one data point of 1.008. We also judgmentally select a tail 
factor for closed claim counts of 1.007, which is based on a review of the relationship between 
closed and reported claim counts at ages of 72, 84, and 96 months. In Exhibit III, Sheet 3, we 
summarize the projected ultimate claim count projections; the selected ultimate claim counts are 
based on the average of the two projections, which are very similar for each year. 
 
 
Compare Ultimate Claim Counts to Exposures and Select Frequency 
 
In this approach, we take the frequency analysis one step further by comparing the ultimate claim 
counts by accident year to an exposure base. (See Exhibit III, Sheet 4.) For U.S. workers 
compensation, the most common exposure base is payroll (in hundreds of dollars). Our goal is to 
determine the appropriate frequency (i.e., number of claims per exposure unit) for the latest two 
accident years. Since payroll is an inflation-sensitive exposure base, we must adjust the payroll 
for each accident year to a common time period. For simplification purposes, we assume a 2.5% 
annual inflation rate for payroll for all years in the experience period and trend all historical 
payroll to the cost level of accident year 2008. (Columns (5) through (7) of Exhibit III, Sheet 4, 
contain these calculations.) 
 
Similarly, the claim counts should be adjusted using trend factors to reflect changes in counts. 
Ideally, the actuary can analyze the self-insurer’s own historical experience to determine the 
frequency trend rate. In our example, however, sufficient historical data is not available. Thus, we 
rely on our knowledge of U.S. workers compensation in general and the specific industry of this 
202

=== PDF PAGE 209 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
self-insured organization; we assume a -1.0% annual trend in the number of claims.63 (See 
calculations in Columns (2) through (4) of Exhibit III, Sheet 4.) 
 
We divide the ultimate trended claim counts in Column (4) of Exhibit III, Sheet 4, by the trended 
payroll in Column (7). After examining the frequency rates by accident year in Column (8), we 
recognize a change in frequency between the earliest years in the experience period (2001 
through 2004) and the most recent years (2006 through 2008).  
 
It is important for the actuary to speak to management at WC Self-Insurer to understand what 
caused the dramatic change in frequency. Has there been a new cost containment program 
introduced? Has there been a change in the definition of a claim? Has there been a change in 
third-party administrators? Was there a change in the type of work performed by employees? We 
note a large increase in both claims and payroll between 2005 and 2006. Was this the result of a 
corporate acquisition? Any of these changes could have an effect on the frequency analysis. In 
our example, we assume that the change in frequency is due to a major acquisition, which 
resulted in the hiring of a new risk manager and the introduction of new safety and risk control 
procedures. Thus, we select a 2008 frequency rate of 0.36%, which is reflective of the new and 
improved environment with respect to claims at this organization. We derive the 2007 frequency 
rate of 0.37% by multiplying 0.36% by 1.025, which represents the adjustment for payroll 
inflation, and dividing by 0.99, which represents the adjustment for claims trend. 
 
 
Project Ultimate Severity 
 
We now turn our attention to the analysis of severity. We begin with projecting paid severities 
and reported severities to an ultimate value (Exhibit III, Sheets 5 through 8). The development 
analysis is presented in Exhibit III, Sheet 6 for paid severities and in Exhibit III, Sheet 7 for 
reported severities. For both paid and reported severities, we select development factors based on 
the medial average (i.e., average excluding high and low values) for the latest five years. We 
select a tail factor at 96 months of 1.025 for the reported severities and 1.15 for the paid 
severities. These selections are based on our analysis of insurance industry benchmark 
development patterns for U.S. workers compensation. 
 
In Exhibit III, Sheet 8, we compare these two projections and select ultimate severities for accident 
years 2001 through 2006. The next step is to adjust the severities for each historical accident year to 
the cost level of accident year 2008. For simplicity purposes, we assume a 7.5% annual severity 
trend rate for WC Self-Insurer. This self-insurer operates throughout the U.S., and for illustration 
purposes, we chose to simplify the model by not incorporating an adjustment of claims by year to 
the 2008 statutory benefits level. Many actuaries would likely incorporate such an adjustment when 
selecting the 2008 severity value, particularly if the entity operated in a single state. In Exhibit III, 
Sheet 9, we select a 2008 severity value of $7,100. We then derive the 2007 severity value of 
$6,605 by dividing the selected 2008 severity by the trend factor or 1.075. 
 
 
                                                 
63 Potential factors that may cause a negative claim count trend for U.S. workers compensation include 
improvements in workplace safety or changes in the mix of job types (e.g., a shift from less construction 
and manufacturing to lower risk “white collar” type of work). 
203

=== PDF PAGE 210 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Project Ultimate Claims 
 
We can now calculate (in Exhibit III, Sheet 10) the projected ultimate claims for accident years 
2007 and 2008. The self-insured organization provided us with the payroll for both accident 
years. We multiply the payroll by the selected frequency rates to determine the projected ultimate 
number of claims (Line (3)). We then multiply the ultimate number of claims by the selected 
severities to derive the projected ultimate claims (Line (5)).  
 
 
Develop Unpaid Claim Estimate 
 
Estimated IBNR is equal to projected ultimate claims less reported claims; and the total unpaid 
claim estimate is equal to estimated IBNR plus case outstanding. 
 
 
Analysis for XYZ Insurer
 
 
We continue the example presented in Exhibit II for XYZ Insurer. (See Exhibit IV, Sheets 1 
through 3.) We use the second frequency-severity approach to review the experience of older, 
more mature accident years for the purpose of determining estimates of both frequency and 
severity for 2007 and 2008. In this second approach, we incorporate adjustments for rate level 
changes, inflation, and tort reform. 
  
In Exhibit IV, Sheet 1, we first summarize the selected ultimate claim counts for accident years 
2002 through 2006. In this example, we rely on the reported claim count projection instead of the 
average of the reported and closed count projections. (See Exhibit II, Sheet 3.) Based on our 
analysis of insurance industry trends, we assume an annual -1.5% claims frequency trend for this 
portfolio.  
 
Ideally, the actuary would have vehicle or policy count available as an exposure base when 
conducting an analysis of unpaid claims for automobile liability insurance. However, there are 
numerous situations in which reliable exposure and policy count data is not available. For XYZ 
Insurer, earned premium is the only exposure data available. We recall from Chapter 6, that the 
insurer provided us with a rate level history for the period 2002 through 2008. Thus, in Columns 
(5) through (7) of Exhibit IV, Sheet 1, we adjust historical earned premiums to the 2008 rate 
level. We divide the trended claim counts by the on-level earned premium to determine frequency 
rates at the 2008 level. We select a 2008 frequency of 2.36%. To determine the 2007 frequency, 
we adjust the selected frequency for 2008 (2.36%) by the annual claim count trend (-1.5%) and 
the rate level change that took place in 2008 (20%). Thus, the 2007 frequency is 1.92%. 
 
In Exhibit IV, Sheet 2, we adjust the projected ultimate severities from Exhibit II, Sheet 6 by 
trend factors to reflect the accident year 2008 cost level. For this example, we assume a 5% 
annual severity trend. We also include an adjustment for the regulatory reforms that took place in 
recent years. After a review of various averages and the adjusted severity indications by year in 
Column (5), we select a 2008 severity value of $26,720. We derive the 2007 severity value of 
$25,448 by adjusting the selected 2008 for one less year of trend. 
 
In Exhibit IV, Sheet 3, we derive projections of ultimate claims for 2007 and 2008 based on the 
earned premium provided by XYZ Insurer and the selected frequency and severity values derived 
204

=== PDF PAGE 211 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
in Exhibit IV, Sheets 1 and 2, respectively. We also calculate the estimated IBNR and the 
estimate of total unpaid claims for accident years 2007 and 2008.  
 
It is interesting to compare the projection of ultimate claim counts, severities, and claims using 
this frequency-severity approach and the first approach. The following table summarizes these 
values. Ultimate claims from the second approach are roughly half of the projections from the 
first approach due to lower projections of both ultimate claim counts and average values per 
claim. 
 
 Approach # 1 Approach # 2 
2007 Ultimate Claim Counts   
  Closed Counts Projection 1,804  
  Reported Counts Projection 1,308  
  Selected Value 1,556 1,199 
2007 Severity 37,606 25,448 
     
2008 Ultimate Claim Counts   
  Closed Counts Projection 1,679  
  Reported Counts Projection 1,172  
  Selected Value 1,426 1,128 
2008 Severity 41,544 26,720 
   
Projected Ultimate Claims ($000)   
  Accident Year 2007 58,516 30,512 
  Accident Year 2008 59,242 30,140 
 
In Chapter 15, we compare and contrast the various projection methods for this example. 
 
 
Frequency-Severity Approach #3 – Disposal Rate Technique  
 
Key Assumptions 
 
Similar to the previous two frequency-severity approaches, we begin this final method by 
projecting reported and closed claim counts to an ultimate value using the development 
technique. Thus, we assume that historical patterns of claims emergence and settlement are 
predictive of future patterns of reported and closed claim counts. An implicit assumption of this 
method is that there are no significant partial (i.e., interim) payments. 
 
In this method, we also explicitly incorporate an inflation adjustment for severity. The selected 
trend rate is an important assumption as a slight change in trend can result in a material change in 
the estimated of unpaid claims, and therefore the trend rate must be selected carefully. 
 
 
205

=== PDF PAGE 212 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Mechanics of the Approach 
 
We present this final frequency-severity method in seven steps: 
 
 Project ultimate claim counts and select ultimate claim counts by accident year 
 Develop disposal rate triangle and select disposal rate by maturity age 
 Project claim counts by accident year and maturity (complete the square) 
 Analyze severities and select severities by maturity 
 Calculate severities by maturity age and accident year (complete the square) 
 Multiply claim counts by severities to determine projected claims 
 Determine unpaid claim estimate 
 
 
Project Ultimate Claim Counts and Select Ultimate Claim Counts by Accident Year 
 
For this example, we use a portfolio of occurrence basis, general liability insurance data (GL 
Insurer). We start by following the same approach as the previous two frequency-severity 
techniques: project ultimate claim counts based on development projections of closed and 
reported claim counts. (See Exhibit V, Sheets 1 through 3.) Our data excludes CNP counts, which 
helps to explain why we observe downward (i.e., negative) development in the age-to-age factors 
for reported claim counts (Exhibit V, Sheet 2). For GL Insurer, we select development factors 
based on the volume-weighted averages for the latest three years. We judgmentally select tail 
factors based on the observed experience for the oldest maturities, including the ratio of closed-
to-reported claim counts, and benchmark patterns for a similar portfolio of coverage. In Exhibit 
V, Sheet 3, we summarize the projection of ultimate closed and reported claim counts; for each 
accident year, we then select the ultimate number of claims, based on the average of the two 
projections.  
 
 
Develop Disposal Rate Triangle and Select Disposal Rate by Maturity Age 
 
The next step is to derive the disposal rate triangle. We define the disposal rate as the cumulative 
closed claim counts for each accident year-maturity age cell divided by the selected ultimate 
claim count for the particular accident year. We present this triangle in the top part of Exhibit V, 
Sheet 4. Each ratio represents the percentage of ultimate claim counts that are closed at a given 
stage of maturity for a given accident year.  
 
In the middle part of Exhibit V, Sheet 4, we calculate various averages of the disposal rates by 
maturity age; we use the medial five-year average to select a disposal rate at each maturity age.  
For our example, we observe considerable stability in the disposal rates at each maturity. The 
following table summarizes the selected disposal rates at maturities 12 months through 96 
months. We generally expect disposal rates to monotonically increase over time, as evidenced by 
the disposal rates in the following table. 
206

=== PDF PAGE 213 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
 
Maturity Age (Months) Selected Disposal Rate 
12 0.200 
24 0.433 
36 0.585 
48 0.710 
60 0.791 
72 0.862 
84 0.882 
96 0.912 
 
 
Project Claim Counts by Accident Year and Maturity (Complete the Square) 
 
In Exhibit V, Sheet 5, we use the selected disposal rates by maturity and the selected ultimate 
claim counts by accident year to complete the square of the incremental closed claim count 
triangle. Incremental claim counts in the column labeled 12 represent counts that are closed in the 
first 12 months from the start of the accident year. Incremental claim counts in the column 
labeled 24 represent the counts that are closed in the period between 12 months and 24 months. 
The rest of the triangle follows a similar naming pattern. (We use similar labeling in the triangle 
of incremental paid claims and incremental paid severities that are presented later in this chapter.) 
 
We calculate the top left part of the “completed square” based on the differences between 
successive columns of the cumulative closed claim count triangle. This part of the completed 
square is simply the incremental closed claim count triangle based on the actual experience for 
GL Insurer. To calculate the bottom-right, highlighted part of the incremental closed claim count 
square, we first adjust the cumulative closed claim counts at the latest valuation to an ultimate 
basis and then apply the selected disposal rates for each age interval. 
 
For example, for accident year x at age y, we calculate projected incremental closed claim counts 
as follows:  
 
[(ultimate claim counts for accident year x – cumulative closed claim counts for 
accident year x along latest diagonal) / (1.00 – selected disposal rate at maturity 
of latest diagonal)] x [disposal rate at y – disposal rate at y-12] 
 
For example, the estimated incremental closed claim counts for accident year 2008 at 24 months 
are equal to: 
 
  [(609 – 127) / (1.000 - 0.200)] x [0.433 – 0.200] = 140 
 
The estimated incremental closed claim counts for accident year 2005 at 84 months are: 
 
  [(588 – 403) / (1.000 – 0.710)] x [0.882 – 0.862] = 13 
 
To differentiate the actual values from the calculated values, we highlight the bottom part of the 
completed square in Exhibit V, Sheet 5. In this frequency-severity approach, we derive projected 
ultimate claims by multiplying incremental closed claim counts by average incremental paid 
claims. The use of incremental claim counts and incremental severities differentiates this 
frequency-severity method from the other methods presented in this chapter.  
207

=== PDF PAGE 214 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Analyze Severities and Select Severities by Maturity 
 
The next step is an analysis of paid severities. We first derive the incremental paid claim triangle 
from the cumulative paid claim triangle (Exhibit V, Sheet 6). We then divide the incremental paid 
claim triangle by the incremental closed claim count triangle to produce incremental paid 
severities. It is worthwhile to pause and observe the patterns in this incremental triangle of paid 
severities. There are significant differences in the incremental paid severities at each maturity 
age. In general, the paid severities increase as the claims mature. This is consistent with the 
common belief that smaller claims settle at a quicker rate than more complicated and costly 
claims. Such patterns are particularly common for long-tail lines of insurance such as U.S. 
general liability. 
 
Since the paid severities for each accident year are at different cost levels, we adjust the severities 
to a common time period (i.e., common cost level) before we analyze the severities and make 
selections. For decades, actuaries have used exponential regression analyses to determine annual 
trend rates. One reason for the use of exponential regression analysis is because it implies a 
constant percentage increase in inflation. Many actuaries believe such trends tend to be most 
indicative of the normal inflation process. Actuaries also use weighted exponential least squares 
fit in order to give greater weight to more recent experience. Linear projections are rarely used 
due to the implied decreasing percentage trend. 
 
In Exhibit V, Sheet 7, we summarize the results of numerous regression analyses for the 
incremental paid severities. To determine a severity trend, we fit many exponential curves to the 
incremental paid severities at each maturity age. We run a variety of combinations of years and  
test for the goodness-of-fit of the regression. In this exhibit, we summarize the estimated annual 
rate of change (i.e., trend rate) and the goodness-of-fit test (i.e., R-squared).
64 Based on GL 
Insurer’s experience alone, we do not find a particularly good fit to the data. However, based on 
our knowledge of industry-wide experience for this particular product type, supplemented with 
this insurer’s limited data, we select a 5% annual severity trend rate.65 There is some evidence, 
based on our example, that trend rates may differ and may be greater for the older maturities. 
However, to simplify our example we use a single trend rate for all maturities. We recommend 
that you test the sensitivity of alternative trend rate assumptions at different maturities. 
 
                                                 
64 It is important to recognize that regression with only a few data points may not be very meaningful and 
certainly is not very robust. The parameter estimate and R-squared can change dramatically by using 
different segments of the data, as in our example with all years versus latest six years or latest four years. 
An extreme example is when there are only two data points to fit; in such situations there will always be a 
perfect fit and 100% R-squared. In our example, there are only two points at 84 months. We note that the 
actuary must take care in interpreting the results of any regression analysis when there are limited data 
points. 
 
65 We have already addressed the challenges of using benchmark data several times in this book. We further 
point out that the potential difficulties in using industry-wide severity trends for general liability. The 
general liability line of business can include a very diverse mixture of coverages including but not limited 
to: excess health, employers’ liability, first-dollar premises and operations, personal umbrella, contractors’ 
liability, and environmental. Thus, it is an extremely heterogeneous line with extreme problems in claim 
count definition consistency and comparability due to class actions, asbestos (accounting files and account 
files versus claimant files), casualty deductibles, etc. When reviewing industry benchmarks for trend (or 
any other purpose), it is important to narrow the review to comparison with data representing similar 
product types and claim characteristics. 
 
208

=== PDF PAGE 215 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
In the middle part of Exhibit V, Sheet 8, we restate all the incremental paid severities at the 2008 
cost level. For example, the incremental paid severity for accident year 2007 at 12 months is 
$10,086; after adjustment for trend to the 2008 cost level, the severity is $10,590 ($10,086 x 
1.051). The incremental paid severity for accident year 2003 at 72 months is $46,648; after 
adjustment for trend to the accident year 2008 cost level, the severity is $59,536 ($46,648 x 
1.055). 
 
We calculate various averages of the trended severities at the bottom of Exhibit V, Sheet 8. As 
noted, we observe an increasing pattern in the paid severities by age from 12 months through 96 
months. At the bottom of Exhibit V, Sheet 8, we select incremental paid severities at the 2008 
cost level for maturity ages 12 months through 60 months. Beyond this point, the data become 
sparse and unreliable for trending purposes. We rely on the simple average of the latest three 
years for our selections. 
 
Where we begin to see variability in the trended severities, we consider combining the experience 
of several maturity ages. Such variability may be the result of one or more large claims that were 
closed at older ages. Variability is also often related to a smaller number of claims in the data set 
at the oldest maturity ages. By combining the experience of multiple years we seek to limit the 
influence of random large claims or other factors that can easily distort patterns in the severities. 
 
In Exhibit V, Sheet 9, we review the combined experience of maturity ages 60 and older and 72 
and older. We first present the triangle of incremental closed claim counts for maturities 60 
through 96 months. We then summarize the incremental paid claims for these same maturities. 
Since the paid claims represent different cost levels, the next step is an adjustment based on the 
selected 5% annual severity trend to bring all payments to the 2008 cost level. The estimated 
trended tail severity is equal to the sum of trended claim payments divided by the sum of the 
incremental closed claim counts. 
 
The importance of the selection of the tail severity (i.e., the average value for the oldest years) is 
similar to the selection of a tail factor for the development technique; tail factors and tail 
severities require substantial judgment. Considerations as to the maturity age at which to combine 
data for analysis of the tail factor depend on: 
 
 The age(s) at which the results become erratic 
 The influence on the total projections of selecting a particular age 
 The percentage of claims expected to be closed beyond the selected maturity age 
 
In our example, we observe greater variability in the trended severities beginning at age 60. The 
selected disposal rate at 60 months is 0.791; in other words, we expect more than 20% of the 
claim counts to remain open at this age. There are 227 incremental closed claim counts in our 
data set at 60 months that can be compared with only 124 at age 72 months. It is quite clear that 
for ages 72 months and older, the experience should be combined for the purpose of selecting an 
incremental tail severity. However, it is less obvious what the actuary should do at 60 months. In 
our example, we select an incremental trended severity of $140,802 at 60 months based on the 
experience of 60-month data only. This is not very different from the estimated severity of 
$144,160 for ages 60 and older developed in Exhibit V, Sheet 9. We select a trended tail severity 
of $175,816 based on the combined experience of ages 72 and greater. The effect of selecting a 
tail severity based on the experience of 60 months and greater, would be a reduction of the unpaid 
claim estimate of more than 10%. This demonstrates the importance of selecting the appropriate 
point at which data should be combined for determining a tail severity. 
 
209

=== PDF PAGE 216 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
In the following table, we summarize the selected severities, at the 2008 cost level, by maturity. 
 
Maturity Age (Months) Selected Severity at 2008 Cost Level 
12 11,259 
24 32,980 
36 65,523 
48 80,544 
60 140,802 
72 and older 175,816 
 
While we have selected increasingly greater severities for GL Insurer for all maturities through 72 
months, it is important to recognize that at some point in time, the average value will likely not 
continue to increase.  
 
When selecting severity values, it is important for the actuary to consider the potential influence 
of large claims on the incremental average paid values. To avoid potential distortions due to 
spurious large claims, the actuary may want to consider capping claims to a predetermined value 
or excluding large claims in their entirety. In either case, the actuary will then need to add a 
provision for large claims to the estimate of unpaid claims. 
 
 
Calculate Severities by Maturity Age and Accident Year (Complete the Square) 
 
Once we have selected severity values at the 2008 accident year cost level, we are ready to 
complete the square for incremental paid severities. The top part of the square is equivalent to the 
incremental paid severity triangle. The bottom part of the square is a function of the selected 
severities at each particular age at the 2008 cost level and the selected trend rate. To complete the 
matrix shown on the bottom part of Exhibit V, Sheet 10, we must adjust the selected severities at 
each age to the cost level expected for each accident year. For example, for accident year 2006 at 
age 48 months, the severity of $73,056 is equal to the selected 2008 cost level severity at 48 
months of $80,544 divided by 1.05
2. Similarly, for accident year 2002 at 96 months, the severity 
of $131,19766 is equal to the selected 2008 cost level severity of $175,816 divided by 1.056.  
 
 
Multiply Claim Counts by Severities to Determine Projected Claims 
 
We now can multiply each accident year-maturity age cell of the two completed squares, the 
incremental closed claim counts and the incremental paid severities, to produce projected 
incremental paid claims. We cumulate the projected incremental paid claims to derive projected 
cumulative paid claims (i.e., projected ultimate claims). (See bottom part of Exhibit V, Sheet 11.) 
 
 
Determine Unpaid Claim Estimate 
 
In Exhibit V, Sheet 12, we calculate unpaid claim estimates in the same way that we have for all 
the previous methods. Estimated IBNR is equal to projected ultimate claims by accident year less 
                                                 
66 Note, slight differences which exist between values in the text and values in the exhibits are due to the 
fact that the exhibits carry a greater number of decimals than shown. 
210

=== PDF PAGE 217 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
reported claims by accident year. The total unpaid claims estimate is equal to estimated IBNR 
plus case outstanding.  
 
We observe an unusually low value of IBNR for accident year 2004 (-$1,950) when compared 
with the immediate preceding year ($3,611) and immediate following year ($9,340). Thus, we 
return to the data to see if we can identify anything unusual in either the claims or the severity for 
this particular year. The closed claim counts in Exhibit V, Sheet 1 seem reasonable when 
compared with other years. We do note, however, that the paid severity for accident year 2004 at 
60 months is low when compared to prior accident years at 60 months and compared to accident 
year 2005 at 48 months. We also note an unusually high case outstanding for accident year 2004 
in comparison with other years. The estimate of total unpaid claims for 2004, however, is 
reasonable when compared to other years. Accident year 2003 seems to have similar issues. The 
incremental paid severity for accident year 2003 is unusually low when compared to other 
accident years, and the IBNR is lower than usual when compared to accident years 2002 and 
2005. 
 
This exemplifies the type of questioning and probing that the actuary should undertake when 
reviewing the results of any technique used for estimating unpaid claims. The actuary should turn 
to claims department management of the insurer to understand the reasons for the high value of 
case outstanding and the low values for average payments, and to determine if there are any 
factors that might preclude the use of this type of projection methodology. 
 
 
Analysis for XYZ Insurer 
 
Before we begin this frequency-severity analysis for XYZ Insurer, we recall from Chapter 6, that 
the closed claim counts for XYZ Insurer exclude claims closed with no payment (CNP) and that 
paid claims include partial payments as well as payments on closed claims. Thus, our average 
paid claim triangle is a combination of payments on settled claims as well as payments on claims 
that are still open. We must consider whether or not the volume of partial payments is significant 
enough such that this mismatch of dollars and claim counts results in severity values that are 
inappropriate for use in this type of methodology. Based on our discussions with claims 
department management, it is our understanding that there is not a large volume of partial 
payments and thus, we proceed with the analysis.
67 
 
In Exhibit VI, Sheets 1 through 8, we present the disposal rate method for XYZ Insurer. Similar 
to Approach #2, we rely on the projected ultimate claim counts derived from the reported claim 
count experience. In Exhibit VI, Sheet 1, we select disposal rates based on the simple average of 
the latest two years. We see evidence of change in the disposal rates for the latest valuations, 
particularly at 12, 24 and 36 months. In Exhibit VI, Sheet 2, we complete the square of projected 
incremental claim counts. The next step is to determine the incremental paid severities; we show 
this process in Exhibit VI, Sheet 3. 
 
In Exhibit VI, Sheet 4, we select severity values at the 2008 cost level (after adjustment for trend 
and tort reform) by maturity age. We assume 5% severity trend for XYZ Insurer. Similar to the 
prior example for GL Insurer, we observe increasing severity values for each successive maturity 
age. As we look at the triangle of incremental paid severities, we observe that the severities along 
                                                 
67 The actuary may also use paid claims on closed claims instead of total paid claims, if such data is 
available. Another option is to use the paid claims in the interval divided by the number of claims open at 
the start of the interval. 
211

=== PDF PAGE 218 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
the latest diagonal are the highest value in each column for six of the eight accident years in our 
experience period. If we return to the questions raised in Chapter 6, we wonder whether or not the 
speed-up in settlement has resulted in a shift in the type of claim now being closed at each 
maturity age. The actuary must consider the effect of this phenomenon on the projection 
methodology and the true unpaid claims requirement for XYZ Insurer.  
 
We perform a review of the tail severity in Exhibit VI, Sheet 5. We select a tail severity of 
$70,432 for ages 84 and 96. In Exhibit VI, Sheets 6 and 7, we present the development of 
projected ultimate claims by accident year-maturity age cell. Exhibit VI, Sheet 8 displays the 
calculation of estimated IBNR and the total unpaid claim estimate. 
 
We compare the results of the three frequency-severity projections for XYZ Insurer with the 
results of the Cape Cod method, the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, the expected claims method, 
and the development method in Exhibit VI, Sheet 9 (projected ultimate claims) and in Exhibit VI, 
Sheet 10 (estimated IBNR). 
 
 
When the Frequency-Severity Techniques Work and When they Do Not 
 
Frequency-severity techniques can be valuable in many situations. Both paid and reported claim 
development methods can prove unstable and inaccurate for the more recent accident years. We 
can address the weaknesses of these methods by separating the estimates of ultimate claims into 
the components of frequency and severity. For many lines of insurance, the number of claims 
reported is stable, and thus the projection of ultimate claim counts based on a development 
approach generally produces reliable estimates. Similarly, we can often estimate the severity, 
particularly for the more mature accident years, with greater certainty. By adjusting severities 
from older years by trend factors, the actuary may be able to readily develop estimates of 
severities for the most recent accident years. Frequency-severity projections can provide a 
valuable alternative for the actuary, particularly for the most recent accident years. 
 
One of the most important advantages of a frequency-severity approach is the potential to gain 
greater insight into the claims process, both with respect to the rate of claims reporting and 
settlement and the average dollar value of claims. Another important strength of many frequency-
severity methods is that they can be used with paid claims data only so that they are independent 
of case outstanding. Thus, changes in case outstanding philosophy or procedures will not affect 
the results of such techniques.  
 
An often-cited advantage of frequency-severity based techniques is the ability to explicitly reflect 
inflation in the projection methodology instead of assuming that past development patterns will 
properly account for inflationary forces. However, the advantage of directly incorporating 
inflation can also be a disadvantage as the method is highly sensitive to the inflation assumption. 
If the inflation assumption proves incorrect, then the estimate of unpaid claims will likely also 
prove incorrect. We suggest that you test the sensitivity of the inflation assumption in several of 
the examples presented in this chapter. 
 
One of the most common reasons that actuaries do not use frequency-severity methods is simply 
the unavailability of data. Another reason that many actuaries do not use these methods is because 
changes in the definition of claim counts, claims processing, or both can invalidate the underlying 
assumption that future claim count development will be similar to historical claim count 
development. Joseph O. Thorne discusses the influence of changes in the definition of a claim in 
his review of the Berquist and Sherman paper “Loss Reserve Adequacy Testing: A 
212

=== PDF PAGE 219 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Comprehensive, Systematic Approach.” Mr. Thorne states: “A change in the meaning of a ‘claim’ 
can cause substantial errors in the resulting reserve estimates when relying on the projection of 
ultimate severity for recent accident years. These changes need not even be internal to the 
company. For example, changes in the waiting periods, statutes of limitation, and no-fault 
coverage can have a significant effect on the meaning of a ‘claim’ and thus on ultimate 
severity.”68 
 
These methods also rely on the mix of claims to be relatively consistent. For example, if an 
unusually stormy season results in numerous but minor slip-and-fall accidents, then a general 
liability insurer may see a significant increase in claim counts but at significantly lower average 
values than typically seen at that accident year maturity. This will distort a frequency-severity 
analysis unless an adjustment is made for the change in the mix of claim types or claim causes. 
 
 
Enhancements for Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
We already address the importance of seasonality in one of the examples presented earlier in this 
chapter. The actuary should consider the influence of seasonality on both the frequency and the 
severity of claims. We also discuss the influence of inflation on both the number of claims and 
the average value of claims. Our discussions of trend with respect to the frequency-severity 
projection methods are intended to be an introduction to the topic only. There is a considerable 
body of literature within the actuarial community that addresses the topic of trend. We 
recommend that the actuary further his or her knowledge on this important topic and incorporate 
more sophisticated trending analyses into the frequency-severity techniques presented in this 
chapter. 
 
As we note previously in this chapter (and other chapters), it is important to understand the data 
underlying the analysis of unpaid claims. This is particularly vital with respect to the type of paid 
claims and claim count statistics that are used in frequency-severity methods. Does the paid 
claims data include significant partial payments? Do you have claim count statistics for the 
number of paid claims or only closed claim counts? If only closed counts are available, is it 
reasonable to calculate an average paid value using paid claims that contain substantial partial 
payments? How are reopened claims treated in the claims database? In some systems, they may 
appear as a negative reported claim count or as a new claim. The actuary must determine, based 
on his or her knowledge of the claims data available and the consistency of such data over time, 
what types of data are most appropriate for each of the different methods.  
 
The examples presented in this chapter ignore the effect of reopened claims. Depending on how 
reopened claims are handled within the insurer’s systems (e.g., is the claim assigned the original 
claim identification number or a new claim identification number?) there could be distortions in 
the claim count statistics due to reopened claims. This could affect both frequency and severity 
indications. Reopened claims are more prevalent in some lines of insurance, such as U.S. workers 
compensation and Canadian automobile accident benefits, than other lines. Depending on the 
method in which the insurer’s claims and information reporting systems handles reopened claims 
and the volume of reopenings, the actuary may choose to segregate reopened claims from other 
claims and analyze reopened claims separately. 
 
 
                                                 
68 PCAS, 1978. 
213

=== PDF PAGE 220 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Techniques 
 
 
Frequency-Severity Projection as Input to Bornhuetter-Ferguson Technique 
 
The projected ultimate claims from a frequency-severity technique are often valuable to the 
actuary as an alternative expected claims estimate for the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. An 
actuary working closely with management and in particular with representatives from the claims 
department may feel more comfortable selecting frequency and severity values than an expected 
claim ratio (or pure premium) value. We suggest that you calculate the unpaid claim estimate for 
XYZ Insurer using one of the frequency-severity projections as the expected claims with the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. 
 
 
214

=== PDF PAGE 221 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 1
Closed Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Half - Year 6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   60   
2003-2 2,547          3,262          3,287          3,291          3,292          3,292          3,292          3,292          3,292          3,292          
2004-1 2,791          3,217          3,240          3,242          3,243          3,243          3,243          3,243          3,242          
2004-2 2,099          2,677          2,695          2,697          2,697          2,698          2,698          2,698          
2005-1 2,370          2,735          2,751          2,754          2,755          2,755          2,756          
2005-2 1,966          2,609          2,630          2,634          2,634          2,634          
2006-1 2,261          2,671          2,694          2,696          2,697          
2006-2 1,949          2,637          2,659          2,662          
2007-1 2,059          2,496          2,520          
2007-2 2,083          2,732          
2008-1 2,533          
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Half - Year 6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
2003-2 1.281 1.008 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2004-1 1.153 1.007 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2004-2 1.275 1.007 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2005-1 1.154 1.006 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
2005-2 1.327 1.008 1.002 1.000 1.000
2006-1 1.181 1.009 1.001 1.000
2006-2 1.353 1.008 1.001
2007-1 1.212 1.010
2007-2 1.312
2008-1
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.277 1.008 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.292 1.009 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.284 1.008 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.274 1.008 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.291 1.009 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
Selected 1.292 1.009 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.305 1.010 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Closed 76.6% 99.0% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
215

=== PDF PAGE 222 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 2
Reported Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Half - Year 6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   60   
2003-2 3,556          3,314          3,301          3,299          3,295          3,294          3,293          3,293          3,293          3,292          
2004-1 3,492          3,262          3,250          3,247          3,247          3,245          3,245          3,244          3,243          
2004-2 2,980          2,712          2,704          2,702          2,700          2,700          2,699          2,699          
2005-1 2,896          2,768          2,761          2,758          2,758          2,758          2,757          
2005-2 2,814          2,650          2,640          2,639          2,638          2,636          
2006-1 2,808          2,712          2,704          2,701          2,700          
2006-2 2,799          2,675          2,670          2,668          
2007-1 2,578          2,533          2,529          
2007-2 2,791          2,778          
2008-1 3,139          
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Half - Year 6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
2003-2 0.932 0.996 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2004-1 0.934 0.996 0.999 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
2004-2 0.910 0.997 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
2005-1 0.956 0.997 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
2005-2 0.942 0.996 1.000 1.000 0.999
2006-1 0.966 0.997 0.999 1.000
2006-2 0.956 0.998 0.999
2007-1 0.983 0.998
2007-2 0.995
2008-1
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.968 0.997 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 0.978 0.998 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.968 0.998 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 0.968 0.997 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 0.978 0.998 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
Selected 0.978 0.998 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 0.975 0.997 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 102.6% 100.3% 100.1% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
216

=== PDF PAGE 223 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claim Counts
Age of Acc. Claim Counts Proj. Ult. Claim Counts Selected
Accident Half-Year at at 6/30/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev Method with Ult. Claim
Half-Year 6/30/08 Closed Reported Closed Reported Closed Reported Counts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2003-2 60  3,292  3,292 1.000 1.000  3,292  3,292  3,292
2004-1 54  3,242  3,243 1.000 1.000  3,242  3,243  3,243
2004-2 48  2,698  2,699 1.000 1.000  2,698  2,699  2,699
2005-1 42  2,756  2,757 1.000 1.000  2,756  2,757  2,757
2005-2 36  2,634  2,636 1.000 1.000  2,634  2,636  2,635
2006-1 30  2,697  2,700 1.000 1.000  2,697  2,700  2,699
2006-2 24  2,662  2,668 1.000 1.000  2,662  2,668  2,665
2007-1 18  2,520  2,529 1.001 0.999  2,523  2,526  2,524
2007-2 12  2,732  2,778 1.010 0.997  2,759  2,770  2,764
2008-1 6  2,533  3,139 1.305 0.975  3,306  3,061  3,061
Total  27,766  28,441  28,568  28,352  28,339
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident half-year in (1) at June 30, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on portfolio of private passenger automobile collision experience.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = Average of (7) and (8) for all accident half-years other than 2008-1. For 2008-1, (9) = (8).
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
217

=== PDF PAGE 224 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 4
Diagnostics
Accident Ratio of Closed to Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Half - Year 6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   60   
2003-2  0.716  0.984  0.996  0.998  0.999  0.999  1.000  1.000  1.000  1.000
2004-1  0.799  0.986  0.997  0.998  0.999  0.999  0.999  1.000  1.000
2004-2  0.704  0.987  0.997  0.998  0.999  0.999  1.000  1.000
2005-1  0.818  0.988  0.996  0.999  0.999  0.999  1.000
2005-2  0.699  0.985  0.996  0.998  0.998  0.999
2006-1  0.805  0.985  0.996  0.998  0.999
2006-2  0.696  0.986  0.996  0.998
2007-1  0.799  0.985  0.996
2007-2  0.746  0.983
2008-1  0.807
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
218

=== PDF PAGE 225 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 5
Reported Claims and Severities
Accident Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Half - Year 6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   60   
2003-2  14,235  14,960  14,921  14,911  14,926  14,864  14,860  14,854  14,850  14,847
2004-1  14,548  14,674  14,643  14,626  14,621  14,610  14,610  14,611  14,617
2004-2  12,129  12,576  12,541  12,531  12,523  12,523  12,510  12,502
2005-1  11,980  11,921  11,882  11,862  11,854  11,844  11,841
2005-2  11,283  11,843  11,805  11,789  11,772  11,770
2006-1  11,947  11,856  11,820  11,772  11,760
2006-2  12,503  12,762  12,706  12,697
2007-1  11,662  11,523  11,492
2007-2  12,647  12,854
2008-1  14,071
Accident Reported Severity = (Reported Claims x 1000) / Reported Claim Counts
Half - Yea
r 6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   60   
2003-2 4,003            4,514            4,520            4,520            4,530            4,512            4,513            4,511            4,510            4,510            
2004-1 4,166            4,498            4,506            4,505            4,503            4,502            4,502            4,504            4,507            
2004-2 4,070            4,637            4,638            4,638            4,638            4,638            4,635            4,632            
2005-1 4,137            4,307            4,304            4,301            4,298            4,294            4,295            
2005-2 4,010            4,469            4,472            4,467            4,462            4,465            
2006-1 4,254            4,372            4,371            4,359            4,356            
2006-2 4,467            4,771            4,759            4,759            
2007-1 4,524            4,549            4,544            
2007-2 4,531            4,627            
2008-1 4,483            
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
219

=== PDF PAGE 226 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 6
Reported Severities
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Severities as of (months)
Half - Year 6   12   18   24   30   36   42   48   54   60   
2003-2  4,003  4,514  4,520  4,520  4,530  4,512  4,513  4,511  4,510  4,510
2004-1  4,166  4,498  4,506  4,505  4,503  4,502  4,502  4,504  4,507
2004-2  4,070  4,637  4,638  4,638  4,638  4,638  4,635  4,632
2005-1  4,137  4,307  4,304  4,301  4,298  4,294  4,295
2005-2  4,010  4,469  4,472  4,467  4,462  4,465
2006-1  4,254  4,372  4,371  4,359  4,356
2006-2  4,467  4,771  4,759  4,759
2007-1  4,524  4,549  4,544
2007-2  4,531  4,627
2008-1  4,483
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Half - Yea
r 6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
2003-2 1.128 1.001 1.000 1.002 0.996 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2004-1 1.080 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.001
2004-2 1.139 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.999 0.999
2005-1 1.041 0.999 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.000
2005-2 1.115 1.001 0.999 0.999 1.001
2006-1 1.028 1.000 0.997 0.999
2006-2 1.068 0.997 1.000
2007-1 1.006 0.999
2007-2 1.021
2008-1
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.047 0.999 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.032 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.039 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
6 - 12 12 - 18 18 - 24 24 - 30 30 - 36 36 - 42 42 - 48 48 - 54 54 - 60 To Ult
Selected 1.039 0.999 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.036 0.997 0.998 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_6 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
220

=== PDF PAGE 227 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 7
Projection of Ultimate Claims
Projected Ultimate
Age of Acc. Reported Using Frequency-Severity Method
Accident Half-Year at Severities CDF Claim Ult. Claims
Half-Year 6/30/08 at 6/30/08 to Ultimate Severities Counts ($000)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2003-2 60  4,510 1.000  4,510  3,292  14,847
2004-1 54  4,507 1.000  4,507  3,243  14,617
2004-2 48  4,632 1.000  4,632  2,699  12,502
2005-1 42  4,295 1.000  4,295  2,757  11,841
2005-2 36  4,465 1.000  4,465  2,635  11,766
2006-1 30  4,356 1.000  4,356  2,699  11,756
2006-2 24  4,759 0.999  4,754  2,665  12,670
2007-1 18  4,544 0.998  4,535  2,524  11,446
2007-2 12  4,627 0.997  4,613  2,764  12,751
2008-1 6  4,483 1.036  4,644  3,061  14,216
Total  28,339  128,413
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident half-year in (1) at June 30, 2008.
(3) Based on portfolio of private passenger automobile collision experience.
(4) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheet 6.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
(6) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 3.
(7) = [(5) x (6) / 1000].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_7 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
221

=== PDF PAGE 228 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit I
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - Auto Collision Insurer Sheet 8
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Case Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Claims at 6/30/08 Ultimate Outstanding at 6/30/08
Half-Year Reported Paid Claims at 6/30/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2003-2  14,847  14,846  14,847  1 0  1
2004-1  14,617  14,614  14,617  3 0  3
2004-2  12,502  12,502  12,502  0 0  0
2005-1  11,841  11,840  11,841  1 0  1
2005-2  11,770  11,765  11,766  5 - 4  0
2006-1  11,760  11,755  11,756  6 - 4  1
2006-2  12,697  12,679  12,670  18 - 27 - 9
2007-1  11,492  11,406  11,446  86 - 46  40
2007-2  12,854  12,648  12,751  206 - 103  103
2008-1  14,071  11,833  14,216  2,239  144  2,383
Total  128,453  128,413  2,565 - 40  2,524
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on portfolio of private passenger automobile collision experience.
(4) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 7.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(5) + (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_1_8 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
222

=== PDF PAGE 229 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Closed Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  510  547  575  598  612  620  635  637
1999  686  819  910  980  1,007  1,036  1,039  1,044
2000  650  932  1,095  1,216  1,292  1,367  1,391  1,402
2001  304  681  936  1,092  1,225  1,357  1,432  1,446
2002  203  607  841  1,089  1,327  1,464  1,523
2003  181  614  941  1,263  1,507  1,568
2004  235  848  1,442  1,852  2,029
2005  295  1,119  1,664  1,946
2006  307  906  1,201
2007  329  791
2008  276
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.073 1.051 1.040 1.023 1.013 1.024 1.003
1999 1.194 1.111 1.077 1.028 1.029 1.003 1.005
2000 1.434 1.175 1.111 1.063 1.058 1.018 1.008
2001 2.240 1.374 1.167 1.122 1.108 1.055 1.010
2002 2.990 1.386 1.295 1.219 1.103 1.040
2003 3.392 1.533 1.342 1.193 1.040
2004 3.609 1.700 1.284 1.096
2005 3.793 1.487 1.169
2006 2.951 1.326
2007 2.404
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 3 3.050 1.504 1.265 1.169 1.084 1.051 1.019 1.008 1.015 1.003
  Latest 2 2.678 1.406 1.227 1.144 1.072 1.048 1.014 1.005 1.015 1.003
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 3.317 1.468 1.250 1.142 1.081 1.045 1.020 1.008 1.015 1.003
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 3 3.025 1.499 1.251 1.157 1.081 1.051 1.018 1.007 1.012 1.003
  Latest 2 2.668 1.415 1.223 1.135 1.070 1.048 1.014 1.006 1.012 1.003
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 2.668 1.415 1.223 1.135 1.070 1.048 1.014 1.006 1.012 1.003 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 6.085 2.281 1.612 1.318 1.161 1.085 1.035 1.021 1.015 1.003 1.000
Percent Closed 16.4% 43.8% 62.0% 75.9% 86.1% 92.2% 96.6% 97.9% 98.5% 99.7% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
223

=== PDF PAGE 230 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Reported Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  634  635  635  637  637  637  637  637
1999  1,026  1,039  1,047  1,050  1,053  1,047  1,047  1,047
2000  1,354  1,397  1,411  1,410  1,408  1,408  1,408  1,408
2001  1,305  1,421  1,449  1,458  1,458  1,455  1,455  1,455
2002  1,342  1,514  1,548  1,557  1,549  1,552  1,554
2003  1,373  1,616  1,630  1,626  1,629  1,629
2004  1,932  2,168  2,234  2,249  2,258
2005  2,067  2,293  2,367  2,390
2006  1,473  1,645  1,657
2007  1,192  1,264
2008  1,036
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.002 1.000 1.003 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.013 1.008 1.003 1.003 0.994 1.000 1.000
2000 1.032 1.010 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.089 1.020 1.006 1.000 0.998 1.000 1.000
2002 1.128 1.022 1.006 0.995 1.002 1.001
2003 1.177 1.009 0.998 1.002 1.000
2004 1.122 1.030 1.007 1.004
2005 1.109 1.032 1.010
2006 1.117 1.007
2007 1.060
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 3 1.096 1.023 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 2 1.089 1.020 1.008 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.116 1.021 1.006 1.000 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 3 1.099 1.025 1.005 1.001 1.000 1.000 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 2 1.092 1.022 1.008 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.092 1.022 1.008 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.131 1.035 1.013 1.005 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 88.4% 96.6% 98.7% 99.5% 99.8% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
224

=== PDF PAGE 231 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claim Counts
Age of Claim Counts Proj. Ult. Claim Counts Selected
Accident Accident Year at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev Method with Ult. Claim
Year at 12/31/08 Closed Reported Closed Reported Closed Reported Counts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998 132  637  637 1.000 1.000  637  637  637
1999 120  1,044  1,047 1.003 1.000  1,047  1,047  1,047
2000 108  1,402  1,408 1.015 1.000  1,423  1,408  1,416
2001 96  1,446  1,455 1.021 1.000  1,476  1,455  1,466
2002 84  1,523  1,554 1.035 1.000  1,576  1,554  1,565
2003 72  1,568  1,629 1.085 1.001  1,701  1,631  1,666
2004 60  2,029  2,258 1.161 1.002  2,356  2,263  2,309
2005 48  1,946  2,390 1.318 1.005  2,565  2,402  2,483
2006 36  1,201  1,657 1.612 1.013  1,936  1,679  1,807
2007 24  791  1,264 2.281 1.035  1,804  1,308  1,556
2008 12  276  1,036 6.085 1.131  1,679  1,172  1,426
Total  13,863  16,335  18,201  16,555  17,378
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit II, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = [Average of (7) and (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
225

=== PDF PAGE 232 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Reported Claims and Severities
Accident Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  11,171  12,380  13,216  14,067  14,688  16,366  16,163  15,835  15,822
1999  13,255  16,405  19,639  22,473  23,764  25,094  24,795  25,071  25,107
2000  15,676  18,749  21,900  27,144  29,488  34,458  36,949  37,505  37,246
2001  11,827  16,004  21,022  26,578  34,205  37,136  38,541  38,798
2002  12,811  20,370  26,656  37,667  44,414  48,701  48,169
2003  9,651  16,995  30,354  40,594  44,231  44,373
2004  16,995  40,180  58,866  71,707  70,288
2005  28,674  47,432  70,340  70,655
2006  27,066  46,783  48,804
2007  19,477  31,732
2008  18,632
Accident Reported Severities = (Reported Claims x 1000) / Reported Claim Counts
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 19,526          20,813          22,152          23,058          25,692          25,374          24,859          24,839          
1999 15,989          18,902          21,464          22,632          23,831          23,682          23,946          23,980          
2000 13,847          15,676          19,237          20,914          24,473          26,242          26,637          26,453          
2001 9,063            11,262          14,508          18,229          23,460          25,523          26,489          26,665          
2002 9,546            13,455          17,219          24,192          28,673          31,379          30,997          
2003 7,029            10,517          18,622          24,966          27,152          27,239          
2004 8,796            18,533          26,350          31,884          31,129          
2005 13,872          20,686          29,717          29,563          
2006 18,375          28,440          29,453          
2007 16,340          25,104          
2008 17,985          
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
226

=== PDF PAGE 233 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Reported Severities
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  19,526  20,813  22,152  23,058  25,692  25,374  24,859  24,839
1999  15,989  18,902  21,464  22,632  23,831  23,682  23,946  23,980
2000  13,847  15,676  19,237  20,914  24,473  26,242  26,637  26,453
2001  9,063  11,262  14,508  18,229  23,460  25,523  26,489  26,665
2002  9,546  13,455  17,219  24,192  28,673  31,379  30,997
2003  7,029  10,517  18,622  24,966  27,152  27,239
2004  8,796  18,533  26,350  31,884  31,129
2005  13,872  20,686  29,717  29,563
2006  18,375  28,440  29,453
2007  16,340  25,104
2008  17,985
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.066 1.064 1.041 1.114 0.988 0.980 0.999
1999 1.182 1.136 1.054 1.053 0.994 1.011 1.001
2000 1.132 1.227 1.087 1.170 1.072 1.015 0.993
2001 1.243 1.288 1.256 1.287 1.088 1.038 1.007
2002 1.409 1.280 1.405 1.185 1.094 0.988
2003 1.496 1.771 1.341 1.088 1.003
2004 2.107 1.422 1.210 0.976
2005 1.491 1.437 0.995
2006 1.548 1.036
2007 1.536
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 3 1.525 1.298 1.182 1.083 1.062 1.033 1.005 0.997 0.991 0.999
  Latest 2 1.542 1.236 1.102 1.032 1.049 1.013 1.011 1.002 0.991 0.999
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.527 1.379 1.269 1.120 1.079 1.044 1.011 0.993 0.991 0.999
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.542 1.236 1.102 1.032 1.049 1.013 1.011 1.002 0.991 0.999 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.310 1.498 1.212 1.100 1.066 1.016 1.003 0.992 0.990 0.999 1.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
227

=== PDF PAGE 234 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 6
Projection of Ultimate Claims
Projected Ultimate
Age of Reported Using Frequency-Severity Method
Accident Accident Year Severities CDF Claim Ult. Claims
Year at 12/31/08 at 12/31/08 to Ultimate Severities Counts ($000)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998 132  24,839 1.000  24,839  637  15,822
1999 120  23,980 0.999  23,956  1,047  25,082
2000 108  26,453 0.990  26,189  1,416  37,083
2001 96  26,665 0.992  26,452  1,466  38,778
2002 84  30,997 1.003  31,090  1,565  48,655
2003 72  27,239 1.016  27,675  1,666  46,107
2004 60  31,129 1.066  33,183  2,309  76,620
2005 48  29,563 1.100  32,519  2,483  80,745
2006 36  29,453 1.212  35,697  1,807  64,505
2007 24  25,104 1.498  37,606  1,556  58,516
2008 12  17,985 2.310  41,544  1,426  59,242
Total  17,378  551,155
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) Based on CDF from Exhibit II, Sheet 5.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
(6) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(7) = [(5) x (6) / 1000].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_6 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
228

=== PDF PAGE 235 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit II
Frequency-Severity Approach 1 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 7
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Case Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Ultimate Outstanding  at 12/31/08
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822 0 0 0
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  290 - 25  265
2000  37,246  36,782  37,083  465 - 163  302
2001  38,798  38,519  38,778  278 - 19  259
2002  48,169  44,437  48,655  3,731  486  4,218
2003  44,373  39,320  46,107  5,052  1,734  6,786
2004  70,288  52,811  76,620  17,477  6,331  23,809
2005  70,655  40,026  80,745  30,629  10,090  40,718
2006  48,804  22,819  64,505  25,985  15,701  41,686
2007  31,732  11,865  58,516  19,867  26,784  46,651
2008  18,632  3,409  59,242  15,223  40,610  55,833
Total  449,626  330,629  551,155  118,997  101,529  220,526
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from insurer.
(4) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 6.
(5) Based on data from insurer.
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(5) + (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_2_7 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
229

=== PDF PAGE 236 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 1
Closed Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  789  1,196  1,255  1,310  1,324  1,327  1,332  1,343
2002  978  1,506  1,609  1,629  1,669  1,676  1,683
2003  1,070  1,557  1,665  1,721  1,738  1,748
2004  1,029  1,525  1,618  1,688  1,717
2005  974  1,459  1,532  1,597
2006  1,746  2,632  2,761
2007  1,683  2,572
2008  1,560
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
2001 1.515 1.050 1.044 1.011 1.002 1.004 1.008
2002 1.539 1.069 1.012 1.025 1.004 1.004
2003 1.456 1.069 1.034 1.009 1.006
2004 1.483 1.061 1.043 1.017
2005 1.498 1.050 1.042
2006 1.507 1.049
2007 1.528
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.494 1.060 1.035 1.016 1.004 1.004 1.008
  Latest 3 1.511 1.053 1.040 1.017 1.004 1.004 1.008
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.496 1.060 1.040 1.014 1.004 1.004 1.008
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.499 1.058 1.035 1.016 1.004 1.004 1.008
  Latest 3 1.513 1.053 1.040 1.017 1.004 1.004 1.008
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Selected 1.499 1.058 1.035 1.016 1.004 1.004 1.003 1.007
CDF to Ultimate 1.698 1.133 1.071 1.034 1.018 1.014 1.010 1.007
Percent Closed 58.9% 88.3% 93.4% 96.7% 98.2% 98.6% 99.0% 99.3%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
230

=== PDF PAGE 237 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 2
Reported Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  1,235  1,321  1,342  1,349  1,350  1,350  1,350  1,350
2002  1,555  1,660  1,685  1,695  1,700  1,700  1,700
2003  1,628  1,740  1,762  1,771  1,775  1,775
2004  1,600  1,714  1,740  1,747  1,750
2005  1,510  1,612  1,639  1,647
2006  2,750  2,941  2,985
2007  2,650  2,842
2008  2,438
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
2001 1.070 1.016 1.005 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
2002 1.068 1.015 1.006 1.003 1.000 1.000
2003 1.069 1.013 1.005 1.002 1.000
2004 1.071 1.015 1.004 1.002
2005 1.068 1.017 1.005
2006 1.069 1.015
2007 1.072
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.070 1.015 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.070 1.016 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.070 1.015 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.070 1.015 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.070 1.015 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Selected 1.070 1.015 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.094 1.022 1.007 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 91.4% 97.8% 99.3% 99.8% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
231

=== PDF PAGE 238 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claim Counts
Age of Claim Counts Proj. Ult. Claim Counts Selected
Accident Accident Year at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev Method with Ult. Claim
Year at 12/31/08 Closed Reported Closed Reported Closed Reported Counts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2001 96  1,343  1,350 1.007 1.000  1,353  1,350  1,351
2002 84  1,683  1,700 1.010 1.000  1,700  1,700  1,700
2003 72  1,748  1,775 1.014 1.000  1,773  1,775  1,774
2004 60  1,717  1,750 1.018 1.000  1,748  1,750  1,749
2005 48  1,597  1,647 1.034 1.002  1,652  1,650  1,651
2006 36  2,761  2,985 1.071 1.007  2,957  3,006  2,982
2007 24  2,572  2,842 1.133 1.022  2,914  2,905  2,909
2008 12  1,560  2,438 1.698 1.094  2,649  2,667  2,658
Total  14,982  16,487  16,745  16,803  16,774
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on U.S. workers compensation self-insurance experience.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit III, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = [Average of (7) and (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
232

=== PDF PAGE 239 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 4
Projection of Ultimate Frequency
Claim Counts
Trend to Trend to Trended Trended
Accident Selected 2008 at Trended Payroll 2008 at Payroll Ultimate
Year Ultimate -1.00% Ultimate ($00) 2.50% ($00) Frequency
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
2001  1,351  0.932 1,260         195,000  1.189  231,794 0.54%
2002  1,700  0.941 1,600         260,000  1.160  301,520 0.53%
2003  1,774  0.951 1,687         280,000  1.131  316,794 0.53%
2004  1,749  0.961 1,680         280,000  1.104  309,068 0.54%
2005  1,651  0.970 1,602         350,000  1.077  376,912 0.43%
2006  2,982  0.980 2,922         790,000  1.051  829,994 0.35%
2007  2,909  0.990 2,880         780,000  1.025  799,500 0.36%
2008  2,658  1.000 2,658         740,000  1.000  740,000 0.36%
Total  16,774  16,289  3,675,000  3,905,581 0.42%
(9) Selected frequency at 2008 level 0.36%
(10) Selected frequency at 2007 level 0.37%
Column and Line Notes:
(2) Developed in (9) in Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
(3) Assume -1.00% annual claim count trend.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Based on U.S. workers compensation self-insurance experience.
(6) Assume 2.50% annual payroll trend.
(7) = [(5) x (6)].
(8) = [(4) / (7)].
(9) Judgmentally selected.
(10) = {(9) x [1 + (annual payroll trend of 2.50%)] / [1 + (annual claim count trend of -1.00%)]}.
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
233

=== PDF PAGE 240 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 5
Calculation of Paid and Reported Severities
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
2001  1,318,000  2,842,000  3,750,000  4,300,000  4,650,000  4,850,000  5,050,000  5,200,000
2002  1,780,000  3,817,000  5,016,000  5,750,000  6,100,000  6,300,000  6,555,000
2003  1,890,000  4,184,000  5,500,000  6,300,000  6,800,000  7,100,000
2004  1,900,000  4,100,000  5,560,000  6,430,000  6,950,000
2005  1,960,000  4,290,000  5,688,000  6,570,000
2006  4,030,000  8,650,000  11,400,000
2007  4,200,000  9,043,000
2008  4,170,000
Accident Paid Severities = Paid Claims / Closed Claim Counts
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  1,670  2,377  2,989  3,283  3,511  3,655  3,790  3,871
2002  1,820  2,535  3,117  3,530  3,654  3,759  3,895
2003  1,767  2,687  3,303  3,660  3,913  4,061
2004  1,847  2,688  3,436  3,810  4,048
2005  2,012  2,941  3,712  4,113
2006  2,308  3,286  4,129
2007  2,496  3,516
2008  2,673
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
2001  3,200,000  4,300,000  4,900,000  5,200,000  5,300,000  5,400,000  5,550,000  5,650,000
2002  4,300,000  5,900,000  6,600,000  6,950,000  7,200,000  7,400,000  7,500,000
2003  4,800,000  6,600,000  7,400,000  7,800,000  8,100,000  8,300,000
2004  4,900,000  6,700,000  7,700,000  8,150,000  8,600,000
2005  5,200,000  7,100,000  7,900,000  8,350,000
2006  10,100,000  13,800,000  15,500,000
2007  10,500,000  14,400,000
2008  10,300,000
Accident Reported Severities = Reported Claims / Reported Claim Counts
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  2,591  3,255  3,651  3,855  3,926  4,000  4,111  4,185
2002  2,765  3,554  3,917  4,100  4,235  4,353  4,412
2003  2,948  3,793  4,200  4,404  4,563  4,676
2004  3,063  3,909  4,425  4,665  4,914
2005  3,444  4,404  4,821  5,071
2006  3,673  4,692  5,193
2007  3,962  5,067
2008  4,225
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
234

=== PDF PAGE 241 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 6
Paid Severities
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  1,670  2,377  2,989  3,283  3,511  3,655  3,790  3,871
2002  1,820  2,535  3,117  3,530  3,654  3,759  3,895
2003  1,767  2,687  3,303  3,660  3,913  4,061
2004  1,847  2,688  3,436  3,810  4,048
2005  2,012  2,941  3,712  4,113
2006  2,308  3,286  4,129
2007  2,496  3,516
2008  2,673
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
2001 1.423 1.257 1.098 1.070 1.041 1.037 1.021
2002 1.393 1.230 1.132 1.035 1.029 1.036
2003 1.520 1.229 1.108 1.069 1.038
2004 1.455 1.278 1.109 1.063
2005 1.461 1.262 1.108
2006 1.424 1.256
2007 1.409
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.454 1.251 1.111 1.059 1.036 1.037 1.021
  Latest 3 1.431 1.266 1.108 1.056 1.036 1.037 1.021
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.447 1.249 1.108 1.066 1.038 1.037 1.021
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Selected 1.447 1.249 1.108 1.066 1.038 1.037 1.021 1.150
CDF to Ultimate 2.698 1.864 1.493 1.347 1.264 1.218 1.174 1.150
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_6 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
235

=== PDF PAGE 242 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 7
Reported Severities
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  2,591  3,255  3,651  3,855  3,926  4,000  4,111  4,185
2002  2,765  3,554  3,917  4,100  4,235  4,353  4,412
2003  2,948  3,793  4,200  4,404  4,563  4,676
2004  3,063  3,909  4,425  4,665  4,914
2005  3,444  4,404  4,821  5,071
2006  3,673  4,692  5,193
2007  3,962  5,067
2008  4,225
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
2001 1.256 1.122 1.056 1.018 1.019 1.028 1.018
2002 1.285 1.102 1.047 1.033 1.028 1.014
2003 1.286 1.107 1.049 1.036 1.025
2004 1.276 1.132 1.054 1.053
2005 1.279 1.094 1.052
2006 1.278 1.107
2007 1.279
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.280 1.108 1.051 1.035 1.024 1.021 1.018
  Latest 3 1.278 1.111 1.052 1.041 1.024 1.021 1.018
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.278 1.105 1.052 1.035 1.025 1.021 1.018
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Selected 1.278 1.105 1.052 1.035 1.025 1.021 1.018 1.025
CDF to Ultimate 1.679 1.314 1.189 1.130 1.092 1.065 1.043 1.025
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_7 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
236

=== PDF PAGE 243 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 8
Projection of Ultimate Severity
Projected Ultimate  
Age of Severities Severities Using  
Accident Accident Year at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Dev. Method with  Selected
Year at 12/31/08 Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported  Severity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2001 96  3,871  4,185 1.150 1.025  4,452  4,290  4,371
2002 84  3,895  4,412 1.174 1.043  4,573  4,601  4,587
2003 72  4,061  4,676 1.218 1.065  4,946  4,980  4,963
2004 60  4,048  4,914 1.264 1.092  5,117  5,366  5,242
2005 48  4,113  5,071 1.347 1.130  5,540  5,730  5,635
2006 36  4,129  5,193 1.493 1.189  6,164  6,174  6,169
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on U.S. workers compensation self-insurance experience.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit III, Sheets 6 and 7.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = [Average of (7) and (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_8 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
237

=== PDF PAGE 244 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 9
Selection of 2008 and 2007 Severities
Selected Trend to Trended
Accident Ultimate 2008 at Ultimate
Year Severity 7.50% Severity
(1) (2) (3) (4)
2001  4,371  1.659 7,251        
2002  4,587  1.543 7,079        
2003  4,963  1.436 7,125        
2004  5,242  1.335 7,000        
2005  5,635  1.242 7,001        
2006  6,169  1.156 7,129        
 (5) Average Trended Severity at 2008 Cost Level
     (a) All Years 7,098        
     (b) All Years Excl. High and Low 7,084        
     (c) Latest 3 Years 7,043        
 (6) Selected 2008 Severity 7,100        
 (7) Estimated 2007 Severity 6,605        
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in (9) in Exhibit III, Sheet 8.
(3) Trend factors with annual severity trend of 7.50%.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Based on (4).
(6) Judgmentally selected.
(7) = {(6) / [1 + (annual severity trend of 7.50%)]}.
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_9 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
238

=== PDF PAGE 245 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit III
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - WC Self-Insurer Sheet 10
Projection of Ultimate Claims and Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Year
2007 2008
(1) Payroll ($00) 780,000        740,000        
(2) Selected Frequency 0.37% 0.36%
(3) Projected Ultimate Claim Counts 2,907            2,664            
(4) Selected Severity 6,605            7,100            
(5) Projected Ultimate Claims 19,200,735   18,914,400   
(6) Reported Claims at 12/31/08 14,400,000   10,300,000   
(7) Case Outstanding at 12/31/08 5,357,000     6,130,000     
(8) Estimated IBNR at 12/31/08 4,800,735     8,614,400     
(9) Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/08 10,157,735   14,744,400   
Line Notes:
(1) Based on U.S. workers compensation self-insurance experience.
(2) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 4.
(3) = [(1) x (2)].
(4) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 9.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
(6) and (7) Based on U.S. workers compensation self-insurance experience.
(8) = [(5) - (6)].
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_3_10 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
239

=== PDF PAGE 246 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit IV
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Projection of Ultimate Frequency
Claim Counts
Trend to Earned On-Level Trended
Accident Selected 2008 at Trended Premium On-Level Premium Ultimate
Year Ultimate -1.50% Ultimate ($000) Adjustment ($000) Frequency
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
2002  1,554  0.913 1,419         61,183  0.914  55,911 2.54%
2003  1,631  0.927 1,512         69,175  0.870  60,204 2.51%
2004  2,263  0.941 2,130         99,322  0.810  80,411 2.65%
2005  2,402  0.956 2,295         138,151  0.704  97,258 2.36%
2006  1,679  0.970 1,629         107,578  0.640  68,850 2.37%
(9) Average Trended Ultimate Frequency at 2008 Level
      (a) All Years 2.48%
      (b) All Years Excluding High and Low 2.47%
      (c) Latest 2 Years 2.36%
(10) Selected 2008 Frequency 2.36%
(11) Estimated 2007 Frequency 1.92%
Column and Line Notes:
(2) Developed in (8) in Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(3) Assume -1.50% annual claim count trend.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(6) Based on rate level history provided by XYZ Insurer.
(7) = [(5) x (6)].
(8) = [(4) / (7)].
(9) Based on (8).
(10) Judgmentally selected.
(11) = {(10) x (on level factor of 0.800) / [1 + (annual claim count trend of -1.50%)]}.
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_4_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
240

=== PDF PAGE 247 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit IV
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Projection of Ultimate Severity
Selected Trend to Tort Trended
Accident Ultimate 2008 at  Reform  Ultimate
Year Severity 5.00% Factors Severity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1998  24,839  1.629  0.670 27,108          
1999  23,956  1.551  0.670 24,899          
2000  26,189  1.477  0.670 25,924          
2001  26,452  1.407  0.670 24,938          
2002  31,090  1.340  0.670 27,914          
2003  27,675  1.276  0.670 23,665          
2004  33,183  1.216  0.670 27,024          
2005  32,519  1.158  0.670 25,222          
2006  35,697  1.103  0.750 29,517          
 (6) Average Trended Severity at 2008 Cost Level
     (a) Latest 5 Years 26,669          
     (b) Latest 5 Years Excl. High and Low 26,720          
     (c) Latest 3 Years 27,254          
 (7) Selected 2008 Severity 26,720          
 (8) Estimated 2007 Severity 25,448          
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in (5) in Exhibit II, Sheet 6.
(3) Trend factors with annual severity trend of 5.00%.
(4) From Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 2.
(5) = [(2) x (3) x (4)].
(6) Based on (5).
(7) Judgmentally selected.
(8) = {(7) / [1 + (annual severity trend of 5.00%)] / (reform impact factor of 1.000)}.
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_4_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
241

=== PDF PAGE 248 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit IV
Frequency-Severity Approach 2 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claims and Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Year
2007 2008
(1) Earned Premium ($000) 62,438            47,797            
(2) Selected Frequency 1.92% 2.36%
(3) Projected Ultimate Claim Counts 1,199              1,128              
(4) Selected Severity 25,448            26,720            
(5) Projected Ultimate Claims 30,512,152     30,140,260     
(6) Reported Claims at 12/31/08 31,732,000     18,632,000     
(7) Case Outstanding at 12/31/08 19,867,000     15,223,000     
(8) Estimated IBNR at 12/31/08 -1,219,848       11,508,260     
(9) Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/08 18,647,152     26,731,260     
Line Notes:
(1) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(2) Developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(3) = [(1) x (2)].
(4) Developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 2.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
(6) and (7) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(8) = [(5) - (6)].
(9) = [(7) + (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_4_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
242

=== PDF PAGE 249 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 1
Closed Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  195  375  510  625  702  752  780  796
2002  199  349  445  508  563  594  626
2003  106  294  383  453  499  542
2004  126  281  377  445  494
2005  114  249  315  403
2006  114  229  300
2007  79  188
2008  127
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
2001 1.923 1.360 1.225 1.123 1.071 1.037 1.021
2002 1.754 1.275 1.142 1.108 1.055 1.054
2003 2.774 1.303 1.183 1.102 1.086
2004 2.230 1.342 1.180 1.110
2005 2.184 1.265 1.279
2006 2.009 1.310
2007 2.380
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 2.315 1.299 1.202 1.111 1.071 1.046 1.021
  Latest 3 2.191 1.306 1.214 1.107 1.071 1.046 1.021
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 2.265 1.296 1.196 1.109 1.071 1.046 1.021
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 2.302 1.298 1.199 1.112 1.070 1.045 1.021
  Latest 3 2.169 1.307 1.210 1.107 1.070 1.045 1.021
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Selected 2.169 1.307 1.210 1.107 1.070 1.045 1.021 1.100
CDF to Ultimate 4.769 2.199 1.682 1.390 1.256 1.174 1.123 1.100
Percent Closed 21.0% 45.5% 59.5% 71.9% 79.6% 85.2% 89.0% 90.9%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
243

=== PDF PAGE 250 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 2
Reported Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  1,299  1,077  1,057  965  930  917  864  870
2002  847  945  864  787  784  743  731
2003  800  831  762  704  669  636
2004  823  862  797  728  684
2005  828  850  765  687
2006  824  809  734
2007  604  620
2008  812
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
2001 0.829 0.981 0.913 0.964 0.986 0.942 1.007
2002 1.116 0.914 0.911 0.996 0.948 0.984
2003 1.039 0.917 0.924 0.950 0.951
2004 1.047 0.925 0.913 0.940
2005 1.027 0.900 0.898
2006 0.982 0.907
2007 1.026
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.024 0.913 0.912 0.962 0.961 0.963 1.007
  Latest 3 1.012 0.911 0.912 0.962 0.961 0.963 1.007
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.031 0.913 0.912 0.957 0.951 0.963 1.007
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.024 0.913 0.912 0.963 0.963 0.961 1.007
  Latest 3 1.010 0.911 0.912 0.963 0.963 0.961 1.007
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Selected 1.010 0.911 0.912 0.963 0.963 0.961 1.007 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 0.753 0.746 0.818 0.897 0.932 0.968 1.007 1.000
Percent Reported 132.8% 134.0% 122.2% 111.5% 107.3% 103.3% 99.3% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
244

=== PDF PAGE 251 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claim Counts
Age of Claim Counts Proj. Ult. Claim Counts Selected
Accident Accident Year at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Ult. Claim
Year at 12/31/08 Closed Reported Closed Reported Closed Reported Counts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2001 96  796  870 1.100 1.000  876  870  873
2002 84  626  731 1.123 1.007  703  736  720
2003 72  542  636 1.174 0.968  636  616  626
2004 60  494  684 1.256 0.932  620  637  629
2005 48  403  687 1.390 0.897  560  616  588
2006 36  300  734 1.682 0.818  505  600  553
2007 24  188  620 2.199 0.746  413  463  438
2008 12  127  812 4.769 0.753  606  611  609
Total  3,476  5,774  4,919  5,150  5,035
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from GL Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit V, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = [Average of (7) and (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
245

=== PDF PAGE 252 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 4
Development of Disposal Rate
PART 1 - Disposal Rate Triangle
Accident Disposal Rate as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  0.223  0.430  0.584  0.716  0.804  0.862  0.894  0.912
2002  0.277  0.485  0.618  0.706  0.782  0.826  0.870
2003  0.169  0.470  0.612  0.724  0.797  0.866
2004  0.200  0.447  0.599  0.707  0.785
2005  0.194  0.423  0.536  0.685
2006  0.206  0.414  0.543
2007  0.180  0.429
2008  0.209
PART 2 - Average Disposal Rate Factors
Average Disposal Rate by Maturity Age
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.198 0.437 0.582 0.708 0.792 0.851 0.882 0.912
  Latest 3 0.198 0.422 0.559 0.705 0.788 0.851 0.882 0.912
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.200 0.433 0.585 0.710 0.791 0.862 0.882 0.912
PART 3 - Selected Disposal Rate Factors
Selected Disposal Rate by Maturity Age
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   To Ult
Selected 0.200 0.433 0.585 0.710 0.791 0.862 0.882 0.912 1.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
246

=== PDF PAGE 253 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 5
Development of Closed Claim Counts
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001 195             375             510             625             702             752             780             796             
2002 199             349             445             508             563             594             626             
2003 106             294             383             453             499             542             
2004 126             281             377             445             494             
2005 114             249             315             403             
2006 114             229             300             
2007 79               188             
2008 127             
Accident Projected Incremental Closed Claim Counts (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   To Ult
2001 195             180             135             115             77               50               28               16               77               
2002 199             150             96               63               55               31               32               24               70               
2003 106             188             89               70               46               43               12               18               54               
2004 126             155             96               68               49               46               13               19               57               
2005 114             135             66               88               52               45               13               19               56               
2006 114             115             71               76               49               43               12               18               54               
2007 79               109             67               55               36               31               9                 13               39               
2008 127             140             91               75               49               43               12               18               53               
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
247

=== PDF PAGE 254 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 6
Calculation of Severities
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
2001  1,119,962  4,373,268  8,398,345  13,490,793  17,372,233  22,052,662  27,359,691  29,901,361
2002  1,411,957  6,287,005  11,443,820  15,520,552  21,295,572  28,410,418  32,468,911
2003  984,748  6,128,957  10,470,758  14,604,684  21,936,647  23,942,499
2004  1,158,659  5,811,172  10,497,504  15,087,416  18,242,570
2005  1,198,767  5,103,837  9,042,134  15,443,929
2006  1,220,778  4,594,746  8,983,864
2007  796,774  4,233,641
2008  1,445,365
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
2001  1,119,962  3,253,306  4,025,077  5,092,448  3,881,440  4,680,429  5,307,029  2,541,670
2002  1,411,957  4,875,048  5,156,815  4,076,732  5,775,020  7,114,846  4,058,493
2003  984,748  5,144,209  4,341,801  4,133,926  7,331,963  2,005,852
2004  1,158,659  4,652,513  4,686,332  4,589,912  3,155,154
2005  1,198,767  3,905,070  3,938,297  6,401,795
2006  1,220,778  3,373,968  4,389,118
2007  796,774  3,436,867
2008  1,445,365
Accident Incremental Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  195  180  135  115  77  50  28  16
2002  199  150  96  63  55  31  32
2003  106  188  89  70  46  43
2004  126  155  96  68  49
2005  114  135  66  88
2006  114  115  71
2007  79  109
2008  127
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  5,743  18,074  29,815  44,282  50,408  93,609  189,537  158,854
2002  7,095  32,500  53,717  64,710  105,000  229,511  126,828
2003  9,290  27,363  48,784  59,056  159,391  46,648
2004  9,196  30,016  48,816  67,499  64,391
2005  10,516  28,926  59,671  72,748
2006  10,709  29,339  61,819
2007  10,086  31,531
2008  11,381
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_6 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
248

=== PDF PAGE 255 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 7
Regression Analysis of Severities
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  5,743  18,074  29,815  44,282  50,408  93,609  189,537  158,854
2002  7,095  32,500  53,717  64,710  105,000  229,511  126,828
2003  9,290  27,363  48,784  59,056  159,391  46,648
2004  9,196  30,016  48,816  67,499  64,391
2005  10,516  28,926  59,671  72,748
2006  10,709  29,339  61,819
2007  10,086  31,531
2008  11,381
Annual Change based on Exponential Regression Analysis of Severities and Accident Year
All Years 8.8% 5.6% 12.0% 10.9% 12.2% -29.4% -33.1%
Latest 6 3.8% 0.1% 12.0% 10.9% 12.2% -29.4% -33.1%
Latest 4 1.8% 1.6% 9.5% 5.0% 12.2% -29.4% -33.1%
All Years x/ 2001 6.4% 0.1% 4.9% 5.0% -21.7% -79.7% 0.0%
Goodness of Fit Test of Exponential Regression Analysis (R-Squared)
All Years 78.7% 34.9% 64.4% 72.2% 8.4% 19.0% 100.0%
Latest 6 70.4% 0.0% 64.4% 72.2% 8.4% 19.0% 100.0%
Latest 4 20.8% 30.6% 85.6% 51.8% 8.4% 19.0% 100.0%
All Years x/ 2001 73.7% 0.0% 47.8% 51.8% 29.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_7 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
249

=== PDF PAGE 256 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 8
Development of Trended Severities
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  5,743  18,074  29,815  44,282  50,408  93,609  189,537  158,854
2002  7,095  32,500  53,717  64,710  105,000  229,511  126,828
2003  9,290  27,363  48,784  59,056  159,391  46,648
2004  9,196  30,016  48,816  67,499  64,391
2005  10,516  28,926  59,671  72,748
2006  10,709  29,339  61,819
2007  10,086  31,531
2008  11,381
Accident Trended Average Incremental Paid Claims Assuming 5% Annual Severity Trend Rate
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  8,082  25,432  41,953  62,309  70,930  131,717  266,697  223,524
2002  9,508  43,554  71,986  86,718  140,711  307,567  169,962
2003  11,857  34,923  62,262  75,372  203,427  59,536
2004  11,177  36,485  59,336  82,045  78,268
2005  12,173  33,486  69,077  84,215
2006  11,806  32,346  68,155
2007  10,590  33,107
2008  11,381
Averages of the Trended Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
Simple Average
  Latest 5 11,426          34,069          66,163          78,132          123,334        166,273        218,329        223,524        
  Latest 3 11,259          32,980          65,523          80,544          140,802        166,273        218,329        223,524        
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 11,455          33,839          66,498          80,544          109,489        131,717        218,329        223,524        
Selected Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
Selected 11,259          32,980          65,523          80,544          140,802        (To be determined in Exhibit V, Sheet 9)
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_8 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
250

=== PDF PAGE 257 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 9
Development of Trended Tail Severity
Accident Incremental Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 60 72 84 96 
2001  77  50  28  16
2002  55  31  32
2003  46  43
2004  49
Total  227  124  60  16
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 60 72 84 96
2001  3,881,440  4,680,429  5,307,029  2,541,670
2002  5,775,020  7,114,846  4,058,493
2003  7,331,963  2,005,852
2004  3,155,154
Accident Trended Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 60 72 84 96
2001  5,461,576  6,585,834  7,467,523  3,576,385
2002  7,739,079  9,534,574  5,438,769
2003  9,357,649  2,560,032
2004  3,835,109
Total  26,393,414  18,680,440  12,906,292  3,576,385
Age 60 & Age 72 &
Older Older
(1) Total Closed Claim Counts  427  200
(2) Total Trended Paid Claims  61,556,530  35,163,116
(3) Estimated Trended Tail Severity  144,160  175,816
(4) Estimated Incremental Trended Paid Severity 140,802        166,273        
(5) Selected Incremental Paid Severity  140,802  175,816
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_9 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
251

=== PDF PAGE 258 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 10
Development of Severities
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  5,743  18,074  29,815  44,282  50,408  93,609  189,537  158,854
2002  7,095  32,500  53,717  64,710  105,000  229,511  126,828
2003  9,290  27,363  48,784  59,056  159,391  46,648
2004  9,196  30,016  48,816  67,499  64,391
2005  10,516  28,926  59,671  72,748
2006  10,709  29,339  61,819
2007  10,086  31,531
2008  11,381
Selected Incremental Paid Severity at 2008 Cost Level
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
Selected 11,259          32,980          65,523          80,544          140,802        175,816        175,816        175,816        175,816        
Accident Incremental Paid Severities Adjusted to Cost Level of Accident Year Assuming 5% Annual Trend Rate
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 5,743            18,074          29,815          44,282          50,408          93,609          189,537        158,854        124,949        
2002 7,095            32,500          53,717          64,710          105,000        229,511        126,828        131,196        131,196        
2003 9,290            27,363          48,784          59,056          159,391        46,648          137,756        137,756        137,756        
2004 9,196            30,016          48,816          67,499          64,391          144,644        144,644        144,644        144,644        
2005 10,516          28,926          59,671          72,748          121,630        151,876        151,876        151,876        151,876        
2006 10,709          29,339          61,819          73,056          127,711        159,470        159,470        159,470        159,470        
2007 10,086          31,531          62,403          76,709          134,097        167,443        167,443        167,443        167,443        
2008 11,381          32,980          65,523          80,544          140,802        175,816        175,816        175,816        175,816        
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_10 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
252

=== PDF PAGE 259 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 11
Projection of Ultimate Claims
Accident Projected Incremental Closed Claim Counts
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 195                180                135                115                77                  50                  28                  16                  77                  
2002 199                150                96                  63                  55                  31                  32                  24                  70                  
2003 106                188                89                  70                  46                  43                  12                  18                  54                  
2004 126                155                96                  68                  49                  46                  13                  19                  57                  
2005 114                135                66                  88                  52                  45                  13                  19                  56                  
2006 114                115                71                  76                  49                  43                  12                  18                  54                  
2007 79                  109                67                  55                  36                  31                  9                    13                  39                  
2008 127                140                91                  75                  49                  43                  12                  18                  53                  
Accident Incremental Paid Severities Adjusted to Cost Level of Accident Year Assuming 5% Annual Trend Rate
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 5,743             18,074          29,815          44,282          50,408          93,609          189,537        158,854        124,949        
2002 7,095             32,500          53,717         64,710          105,000        229,511        126,828        131,196        131,196        
2003 9,290             27,363          48,784          59,056          159,391        46,648          137,756        137,756        137,756        
2004 9,196             30,016          48,816          67,499          64,391          144,644        144,644        144,644        144,644        
2005 10,516          28,926          59,671          72,748          121,630        151,876        151,876        151,876        151,876        
2006 10,709          29,339          61,819          73,056          127,711        159,470        159,470        159,470        159,470        
2007 10,086          31,531          62,403          76,709          134,097        167,443        167,443        167,443        167,443        
2008 11,381          32,980          65,523          80,544          140,802        175,816        175,816        175,816        175,816        
Accident Projected Incremental Paid Claims = Projected Closed Claim Counts x Projected Incremental Paid Severities
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108+
2001 1,119,962     3,253,306     4,025,077     5,092,448     3,881,440     4,680,429     5,307,029     2,541,670     9,596,072     
2002 1,411,957     4,875,048     5,156,815     4,076,732     5,775,020     7,114,846     4,058,493     3,120,609     9,153,788     
2003 984,748        5,144,209     4,341,801     4,133,926     7,331,963     2,005,852     1,676,592     2,514,887     7,377,003     
2004 1,158,659     4,652,513
    4,686,332     4,589,912     3,155,154     6,632,371     1,868,273     2,802,410     8,220,403     
2005 1,198,767     3,905,070     3,938,297     6,401,795     6,291,855     6,886,544     1,939,872     2,909,807     8,535,435     
2006 1,220,778     3,373,968     4,389,118     5,556,332     6,294,164     6,889,072     1,940,584     2,910,875     8,538,568     
2007 796,774        3,436,867     4,181,633     4,227,190     4,788,524     5,241,122     1,476,372     2,214,559     6,496,039     
2008 1,445,365     4,625,488     5,994,988     6,060,300     6,865,055     7,513,922     2,116,598     3,174,896     9,313,030     
Accident Projected Cumulative Paid Claims
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108+
2001 1,119,962     4,373,268     8,398,345     13,490,793  17,372,233   22,052,662   27,359,691   29,901,361   39,497,433  
2002 1,411,957     6,287,005     11,443,820  15,520,552   21,295,572   28,410,418   32,468,911   35,589,520   44,743,308  
2003 984,748        6,128,957     10,470,758  14,604,684   21,936,647   23,942,499   25,619,091   28,133,978   35,510,981  
2004 1,158,659     5,811,172     10,497,504  15,087,416   18,242,570   24,874,941   26,743,214   29,545,624   37,766,027  
2005 1,198,767     5,103,837     9,042,134     15,443,929  21,735,784   28,622,328   30,562,200   33,472,007   42,007,442  
2006 1,220,778   
 4,594,746     8,983,864     14,540,196  20,834,360   27,723,432   29,664,016   32,574,891   41,113,459  
2007 796,774        4,233,641     8,415,274     12,642,464  17,430,988   22,672,110   24,148,483   26,363,041   32,859,080  
2008 1,445,365     6,070,853     12,065,841  18,126,141   24,991,196   32,505,117   34,621,715   37,796,611   47,109,641  
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_11 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
253

=== PDF PAGE 260 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit V
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - GL Insurer Sheet 12
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Case Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Ultimate Outstanding at 12/31/08
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2001  35,592  29,901  39,497  5,691  3,905  9,596
2002  36,330  32,469  44,743  3,861  8,414  12,274
2003  31,900  23,942  35,511  7,958  3,611  11,568
2004  39,716  18,243  37,766  21,473 - 1,950  19,523
2005  32,667  15,444  42,007  17,223  9,340  26,564
2006  27,774  8,984  41,113  18,790  13,339  32,130
2007  16,246  4,234  32,859  12,013  16,613  28,625
2008  8,216  1,445  47,110  6,771  38,894  45,664
Total  228,441  134,662  320,607  93,779  92,166  185,945
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from GL Insurer.
(4) Developed in  in Exhibit V, Sheet 11.
(5) Based on data from GL Insurer.
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(5) + (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_5_12 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
254

=== PDF PAGE 261 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Development of Disposal Rate
PART 1 - Disposal Rate Triangle
Accident Disposal Rate as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  0.209  0.468  0.643  0.751  0.842  0.933  0.984  0.994
2002  0.131  0.391  0.541  0.701  0.854  0.942  0.980
2003  0.111  0.377  0.577  0.775  0.924  0.962
2004  0.104  0.375  0.637  0.819  0.897
2005  0.123  0.466  0.693  0.810
2006  0.183  0.540  0.716
2007  0.251  0.605
2008  0.236
PART 2 - Average Disposal Rate Factors
Average Disposal Rate by Maturity Age
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 3 0.223 0.537 0.682 0.801 0.892 0.945 0.982 0.994
  Latest 2 0.244 0.572 0.704 0.814 0.910 0.952 0.982 0.994
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.180 0.461 0.636 0.778 0.875 0.942 0.982 0.994
PART 3 - Selected Disposal Rate Factors
Disposal Rate Selection
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   To Ult
Selected 0.244 0.572 0.704 0.814 0.910 0.952 0.982 0.994 1.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
255

=== PDF PAGE 262 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Development of Closed Claim Counts
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  304  681  936  1,092  1,225  1,357  1,432  1,446
2002  203  607  841  1,089  1,327  1,464  1,523
2003  181  614  941  1,263  1,507  1,568
2004  235  848  1,442  1,852  2,029
2005  295  1,119  1,664  1,946
2006  307  906  1,201
2007  329  791
2008  276
Accident Projected Incremental Closed Claim Counts
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   To Ult
2001 304               377               255               156               133               132               75                 14                 9                   
2002 203               404               234               248               238               137               59                 21                 10                 
2003 181               433               327               322               244               61                 39                 16                 8                   
2004 235               613               594               410               177               109               78                 31                 16                 
2005 295               824               545               282               235               103               74                 29                 15                 
2006 307               599               295               177               155               68                 48                 19                 10                 
2007 329               462               160               133               116               51                 36                 15                 7                   
2008 276               389               156               130               114               50                 36                 14                 7                   
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
256

=== PDF PAGE 263 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Calculation of Severities
Accident Paid Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001 1,539            5,952            12,319          18,609          24,387          31,090          37,070          38,519          
2002 2,318            7,932            13,822          22,095          31,945          40,629          44,437          
2003 1,743            6,240            12,683          22,892          34,505          39,320          
2004 2,221            9,898            25,950          43,439          52,811          
2005 3,043            12,219          27,073          40,026          
2006 3,531            11,778          22,819          
2007 3,529            11,865          
2008 3,409            
Accident Incremental Paid Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001 1,539            4,413            6,367            6,289            5,778            6,703            5,980            1,450            
2002 2,318            5,614            5,891            8,273            9,850            8,683            3,809            
2003 1,743            4,497            6,443            10,209          11,613          4,815            
2004 2,221            7,677            16,052          17,489          9,372            
2005 3,043            9,176            14,854          12,953          
2006 3,531            8,247            11,041          
2007 3,529            8,336            
2008 3,409            
Accident Incremental Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001 304               377               255               156               133               132               75                 14                 
2002 203               404               234               248               238               137               59                 
2003 181               433               327               322               244               61                 
2004 235               613               594               410               177               
2005 295               824               545               282               
2006 307               599               295               
2007 329               462               
2008 276               
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001 5,064            11,705          24,969          40,317          43,445          50,781          79,730          103,551        
2002 11,417          13,896          25,175          33,359          41,386          63,382          64,556          
2003 9,631            10,386          19,703          31,706          47,592          78,942          
2004 9,452            12,524          27,023          42,657          52,947          
2005 10,315          11,136          27,255          45,934          
2006 11,502          13,768          37,427          
2007 10,726          18,043          
2008 12,351          
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
257

=== PDF PAGE 264 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Development of Trended Severities
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  5,064  11,705  24,969  40,317  43,445  50,781  79,730  103,551
2002  11,417  13,896  25,175  33,359  41,386  63,382  64,556
2003  9,631  10,386  19,703  31,706  47,592  78,942
2004  9,452  12,524  27,023  42,657  52,947
2005  10,315  11,136  27,255  45,934
2006  11,502  13,768  37,427
2007  10,726  18,043
2008  12,351
Accident Incremental Paid Severities Trended at 5% Annual Severity Trend Rate and Adjusted for Tort Reform
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001  4,774  11,035  23,540  38,009  40,958  47,874  75,166  97,624
2002  10,251  12,476  22,604  29,952  37,159  56,908  57,963
2003  8,236  8,881  16,848  27,112  40,697  67,504
2004  7,697  10,199  22,008  34,739  43,119
2005  8,001  8,637  21,139  35,627
2006  9,510  11,384  30,948
2007  11,263  18,945
2008  12,351
Averages of the Trended Incremental Paid Severities
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
Simple Average
  Latest 3 11,042          12,989          24,698          32,493          40,325          57,429          66,565          97,624          
  Latest 2 11,807          15,165          26,043          35,183          41,908          62,206          66,565          97,624          
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 9,591            10,155          21,917          33,439          40,827          56,908          66,565          97,624          
Selected Incremental Paid Severities
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
Selected 11,807          15,165          26,043          35,183          41,908          62,206          (TBD in Exhibit VI, Sheet 5)
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
258

=== PDF PAGE 265 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Development of Trended Tail Severity
Accident Incremental Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 72   84   96   
2001  132  75  14
2002  137  59
2003  61
Total  330  134  14
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 72        84        96        
2001  6,703,111  5,979,775  1,449,720
2002  8,683,309  3,808,813
2003  4,815,457
Accident Trended and Adj. Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 72        84        96        
2001  6,319,407  5,637,477  1,366,734
2002  7,796,431  3,419,796
2003  4,117,739
Total  18,233,577  9,057,273  1,366,734
Age 72 & Age 84 &
Older Older
(1) Total Closed Claim Counts  478  148
(2) Total Trended Paid Claims  28,657,584  10,424,007
(3) Estimated Trended Tail Severity  59,953  70,432
(4) Estimated Incremental Trended Paid Severity 62,206                 66,565                 
(5) Selected Incremental Paid Severity  62,206  70,432
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
259

=== PDF PAGE 266 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 6
Development of Severities
Accident Incremental Paid Severities as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
2001 5,064             11,705           24,969           40,317           43,445           50,781           79,730           103,551         
2002 11,417           13,896           25,175           33,359           41,386           63,382           64,556           
2003 9,631             10,386           19,703           31,706           47,592           78,942           
2004 9,452             12,524           27,023           42,657           52,947           
2005 10,315           11,136           27,255           45,934           
2006 11,502           13,768           37,427           
2007 10,726           18,043           
2008 12,351           
Selected Incremental Paid Severities at 2008 Cost Level
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   
Selected 11,807           15,165           26,043           35,183           41,908           62,206           70,432           70,432           70,432           
Accident Incremental Paid Severities Adjusted to Cost Level of Accident Year Assuming 5% Annual Trend Rate and Tort Reform Adjustment
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   
2001 5,064             11,705           24,969           40,317           43,445           50,781           79,730           103,551         74,709           
2002 11,417           13,896           25,175           33,359           41,386           63,382           64,556           78,444           78,444           
2003 9,631             10,386           19,703           31,706           47,592           78,942           82,367           82,367           82,367           
2004 9,452             12,524           27,023           42,657           52,947           76,384           86,485           86,485           86,485           
2005 10,315           11,136           27,255           45,934           54,032           80,203           90,809           90,809           90,809           
2006 11,502           13,768           37,427           42,549           50,682           75,230           85,179           85,179           85,179           
2007 10,726           18,043           24,803           33,508           39,912           59,244           67,079           67,079           67,079           
2008 12,351           15,165           26,043           35,183           41,908           62,206           70,432           70,432           70,432           
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_6 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
260

=== PDF PAGE 267 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 7
Projection of Ultimate Claims
Accident Projected Incremental Closed Claim Counts
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 304                 377                 255                 156                 133                 132                 75                   14                   9                     
2002 203                 404                 234                 248                 238                 137                 59                   21                   10                   
2003 181                 433                 327                 322                 244                 61                   39                   16                   8                     
2004 235                 613                 594                 410                 177                 109                 78                   31                   16                   
2005 295                 824                 545                 282                 235                 103                 74                   29                   15                   
2006 307                 599                 295                 177                 155                 68                   48                   19                   10                   
2007 329                 462                 160                 133                 116                 51                   36                   15                   7                     
2008 276                 389                 156                 130                 114                 50                   36                   14                   7                     
Accident Incremental Paid Severities Adjusted to Cost Level of Accident Year Assuming 5% Annual Trend Rate and Tort Reform Adjustment
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 5,064              11,705            24,969            40,317            43,445            50,781            79,730            103,551          74,709            
2002 11,417           13,896            25,175            33,359            41,386            63,382            64,556            78,444            78,444            
2003 9,631              10,386            19,703            31,706            47,592            78,942            82,367            82,367            82,367            
2004 9,452              12,524            27,023            42,657            52,947            76,384            86,485            86,485            86,485            
2005 10,315           11,136            27,255            45,934            54,032            80,203            90,809            90,809            90,809            
2006 11,502           13,768            37,427            42,549            50,682            75,230            85,179            85,179            85,179            
2007 10,726           18,043            24,803            33,508            39,912            59,244            67,079            67,079            67,079            
2008 12,351           15,165            26,043            35,183            41,908            62,206            70,432            70,432            70,432            
Accident Projected Incremental Paid Claims = Projected Closed Claim Counts x Projected Paid Severities
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 1,539              4,413              6,367              6,289              5,778              6,703              5,980              1,450              672                 
2002 2,318              5,614              5,891              8,273              9,850              8,683              3,809              1,621              811                 
2003 1,743              4,497              6,443              10,209            11,613            4,815              3,224              1,290              645                 
2004 2,221              7,677              16,052            17,489            9,372              8,324              6,732              2,693              1,346              
2005 3,043              9,176              14,854            12,953            12,715            8,257              6,678              2,671              1,336              
2006 3,531              8,247              11,041            7,551              7,850              5,098              4,123              1,649              825                 
2007 3,529              8,336              3,957              4,454              4,630              3,007              2,432              973                 486                 
2008 3,409              5,893              4,073              4,585              4,767              3,095              2,503              1,001              501                 
Accident Projected Cumulative Paid Claims
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108+
2001 1,539              5,952              12,319            18,609            24,387            31,090            37,070            38,519            39,192            
2002 2,318              7,932              13,822            22,095            31,945            40,629            44,437            46,059            46,869            
2003 1,743              6,240              12,683            22,892            34,505            39,320            42,544            43,834            44,479            
2004 2,221              9,898              25,950            43,439            52,811            61,135            67,867            70,560            71,906            
2005 3,043              12,219            27,073            40,026            52,742            60,999            67,677            70,349            71,684            
2006 3,531              11,778            22,819            30,370            38,220            43,317            47,440            49,089            49,913            
2007 3,529              11,865            15,822            20,276            24,906            27,914            30,345            31,318            31,805            
2008 3,409              9,302              13,375            17,961            22,727            25,823            28,326            29,328            29,828            
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_7 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
261

=== PDF PAGE 268 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 8
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Case Unpaid Claim Estimate
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Ultimate Outstanding at 12/31/08
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2001  38,798  38,519  39,192  278  394  672
2002  48,169  44,437  46,869  3,731 - 1,300  2,432
2003  44,373  39,320  44,479  5,052  106  5,159
2004  70,288  52,811  71,906  17,477  1,618  19,095
2005  70,655  40,026  71,684  30,629  1,029  31,658
2006  48,804  22,819  49,913  25,985  1,109  27,094
2007  31,732  11,865  31,805  19,867  73  19,940
2008  18,632  3,409  29,828  15,223  11,196  26,419
Total  371,451  253,208  385,676  118,243  14,226  132,469
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) Developed in Exhibit VI, Sheet 7.
(5) Based on data from insurer.
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(5) + (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_8 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
262

=== PDF PAGE 269 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 9
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape Frequency-Severity
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod Method 1 Method 2 Method 3
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,660  15,822  15,977  15,822  15,822
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  24,665  25,107  25,158  25,107  25,082
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  35,235  37,246  37,841  37,246  37,083
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  39,150  38,798  40,525  38,798  38,778  39,192
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  47,906  48,312  49,417  48,313  48,655  46,869
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  54,164  45,068  50,768  45,062  46,107  44,479
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  86,509  75,492  82,593  74,754  76,620  71,906
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  108,172  79,129  94,301  77,931  80,745  71,684
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  70,786  60,404  71,205  58,759  64,505  49,913
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  39,835  45,221  45,636  43,307  58,516  30,512  31,805
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  39,433  42,607  41,049  39,201  59,242  30,140  29,828
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  561,516  513,207  554,471  504,300  551,155
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(7) and (8) Developed in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(9) Developed in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(10) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 6.
(11) Developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(12) Developed in Exhibit VI, Sheet 7.
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_9 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
263

=== PDF PAGE 270 ===
Chapter 11 - Frequency-Severity Technique Exhibit VI
Frequency-Severity Approach 3 - XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 10
Summary of IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR
Accident Outstanding Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape Frequency-Severity
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod Method 1 Method 2 Method 3
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1998 0 0  158 - 162 0  155 0 0
1999  290 - 25  58 - 442 0  51 0 - 25
2000  465 - 298  676 - 2,011 0  595 0 - 163
2001  278 - 310  1,802  352 0  1,728 0 - 19  394
2002  3,731  145  1,423 - 262  143  1,248  144  486 - 1,300
2003  5,052  577  5,485  9,791  695  6,396  690  1,734  106
2004  17,477  4,498  10,249  16,221  5,204  12,305  4,466  6,331  1,618
2005  30,629  6,006  9,678  37,517  8,474  23,646  7,276  10,090  1,029
2006  25,985  9,566  23,304  21,982  11,600  22,401  9,955  15,701  1,109
2007  19,867  16,247  46,209  8,103  13,489  13,904  11,575  26,784 - 1,220  73
2008  15,223  28,898  56,363  20,801  23,975  22,417  20,569  40,610  11,508  11,196
Total  118,997  65,303  155,405  111,890  63,581  104,845  54,674  101,529
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) and (4) Estimated in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) Estimated in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
(6) and (7) Estimated in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(8) Estimated in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(9) Estimated in Exhibit II, Sheet 7.
(10) Estimated in Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(11) Estimated in Exhibit VI, Sheet 8.
Exhibits Combined.xls 11_6_10 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
264

=== PDF PAGE 271 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique 
 
 
CHAPTER 12 – CASE OUTSTANDING DEVELOPMENT 
TECHNIQUE 
 
 
In “Loss Reserving,”69 Ronald Wiser describes a development approach that incorporates the 
historical relationships between paid claims and case outstanding. Mr. Wiser states: “The reserve 
development method attempts to analyze the adequacy of case reserves based on the history of 
payments against those case reserves.” In this chapter, we present two accident year examples of 
Mr. Wiser’s case outstanding development technique.
70  In this chapter, we refer to this technique 
as Approach #1. We also present an example for a self-insurer of the standard development 
technique applied to case outstanding in which the case outstanding development factors to ultimate 
are derived from industry-based benchmark reported and paid claim development factors; we refer 
to this example as Approach #2. 
 
 
Case Outstanding Development Technique – Approach #1 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
Assumptions for the case outstanding development technique are similar to those for other 
development techniques described in this book. An additional important assumption is that claims 
activity related to IBNR is related consistently to claims already reported.  
 
 
Common Uses 
 
The case outstanding development technique is not used extensively by actuaries. The assumption 
that IBNR claim activity is related to claims already reported (i.e., development on known claims 
versus pure IBNR) limits its use. In other words, this method is appropriate when applied to lines 
of insurance for which most of the claims are reported in the first accident period. It is this 
requirement that makes the case outstanding development method so strong for claims-made 
coverages and report year analysis because the claims for a given accident year are known at the 
end of the accident year.  
 
 
Mechanics of the Method 
 
We use both U.S. Industry Auto and XYZ Insurer as examples of the case outstanding 
development technique. We begin with an explanation of the projection for U.S. Industry Auto.  
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 1, we summarize the development triangles for case outstanding and 
incremental paid claims. These are derived from the reported and paid claim triangles presented 
in Chapter 7. The next step is to calculate the ratio of the incremental paid claims at age x to the 
                                                 
69 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001. 
 
70 The case outstanding development method can also be used with report year data; such analysis can be 
valuable for testing the accuracy of case outstanding on known claims over time. We refer the reader to 
both Wiser’s “Loss Reserving” and “Loss Reserve Testing: A Report Year Approach,” by W.H. Fisher and 
J.T. Lange (PCAS, 1973). 
265

=== PDF PAGE 272 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique 
 
 
case outstanding at age x-12. (See Exhibit I, Sheet 2.) This ratio tells us the proportion of claims 
that were paid during the development interval (i.e., age x-12 to age x) on the claims outstanding 
at the beginning of the age (i.e., age x-12). For example, the incremental paid claims for accident 
year 1998 were $14,691,785 between the 12- and 24-month age interval (labeled 24 months in 
our development triangle). At the end of 12 months, the case outstanding for accident year 1998 
was $18,478,233. Thus, the incremental payment in the 12-to-24 month interval represents 79.5% 
of the case outstanding at 12 months (i.e., $14,691,785/$18,478,233). Similarly, the incremental 
paid claims for accident year 2004 between 24 and 36 months were $7,746,815. At the end of 24 
months, the case outstanding for accident year 2004 was $11,150,459. Thus, the payment in the 
this interval represents 69.5% of the case outstanding at 24 months (i.e. $7,746,815/$11,150,459) 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 2, we present the triangle of ratios of incremental paid claims to previous case 
outstanding and calculate various averages of these ratios at each maturity. In our example, we 
select ratios based on the simple average of the latest three years. For the ratio to ultimate, we 
judgmentally select a ratio of 1.10. In other words, we assume that 10% more than the case 
outstanding at 120 months will ultimately be paid out. 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 3, we calculate the ratios of the case outstanding to the previous case 
outstanding; these ratios are equal to the case outstanding at age x divided by the case outstanding 
at age x-12. For example, the case outstanding for accident year 1998 is $9,937,970 at 24 months 
and $18,478,233 at 12 months. Thus, the ratio of the case outstanding to the previous case 
outstanding at 24 months is equal to $9,937,970/$18,478,233, or 0.538. For accident year 2004, 
the case outstanding at 36 months is $6,316,995, and the case outstanding at 24 months is 
$11,150,459. Thus, the ratio of case outstanding to previous case outstanding for accident year 
2004 at 36 months is 0.567 ($6,316,995/$11,150,459). At the bottom of Exhibit I, Sheet 3, we 
calculate various averages and select ratios based on the simple average for the latest three years. 
For the ratio to ultimate, we judgmentally select 0.00. In other words, we make a simplifying 
assumption in this example for U.S. Industry Auto that there will be no case outstanding 
remaining for 132 months and later.
71 
 
A challenge of this technique is the selection of the “to ultimate” ratios for both the ratio of 
incremental paid claims to previous case outstanding and the ratio of case outstanding to previous 
case outstanding. These concepts are not frequently used nor are there readily available 
benchmarks for comparison purposes.   
 
The goal of the case outstanding development method is to project ultimate claims based on 
completing the square of incremental paid claims. In this method, the incremental paid claims in 
each interval are related to the case outstanding at the beginning of the interval. Thus, the next 
step is to complete the square of the case outstanding triangle. We will then be able to project the 
incremental paid claims using the completed square of case outstanding.  
 
We use the selected ratios of case outstanding to previous case outstanding in Exhibit I, Sheet 3, 
to project the case outstanding for each accident year and age combination in Exhibit I, Sheet 4. 
Examples will assist in understanding the mechanics of this projection. For accident year 1999, 
the projected case outstanding at 120 months of $107,435 is equal to the 0.580 selected ratio at 
120 months multiplied by the case outstanding at 108 months of $185,233. Similarly, for accident 
year 2007, the projected case outstanding at 24 months of $11,374,010 is equal to the 0.526 
selected ratio at 24 months multiplied by the case outstanding at 12 months of $21,623,594. (See 
top section of Exhibit I, Sheet 4.) 
                                                 
71 If the actuary were to choose a ratio of case outstanding to previous case outstanding greater than 0.0 
beyond 120 months, the size of the projection matrices in Exhibit I, Sheet 4 would require expansion.  
266

=== PDF PAGE 273 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique 
 
 
Now that we have the completed square of case outstanding, we can use the selected ratios of 
incremental paid claims to case outstanding to project incremental paid claims for all accident 
years and maturities. (See middle section of Exhibit I, Sheet 4.) Again, we use examples to 
demonstrate the calculations. To project the 2000 accident year incremental payments for 120 
months (i.e., the interval 108 to 120 months is labeled 120 months in the exhibit), we multiply the 
0.524 selected ratio at 120 months by the case outstanding at 108 months ($205,370 x 0.524 = 
$107,614). Similarly, accident year 2006 incremental paid claims at 48 months of $4,459,444 are 
equal to the selected ratio at 48 months of 0.714 multiplied by the case outstanding at 36 months 
of $6,245,721. 
 
The highlighted cells represent the projected values; the others values are from the original data 
triangles for U.S. Industry Auto. 
 
At the bottom of Exhibit I, Sheet 4, we calculate cumulative paid claims. The projected ultimate 
claims are equal to the last column of the cumulative paid claims. (Ultimate claims are also 
summarized in Column (4) of Exhibit I, Sheet 5.) We calculate estimated IBNR and the total 
unpaid claim estimate in Exhibit I, Sheet 5 in the same manner as that presented in the preceding 
chapters. Estimated IBNR is equal to projected ultimate claims minus reported claims, and the 
total unpaid claim estimate is equal to projected ultimate claims less paid claims. We suggest that 
you compare the results of the case outstanding development method with the reported and paid 
claim development projections from Chapter 7. 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
We present the example for XYZ Insurer in Exhibit II, Sheets 1 through 5; these exhibits follow 
the exact same format as Exhibit I. We first present the case outstanding and incremental paid 
claim triangles. The next step is to calculate the ratios of incremental paid claims to previous case 
outstanding (Exhibit II, Sheet 2) and the ratios of case outstanding to previous case outstanding 
(Exhibit II, Sheet 3). As a result of the various operational and environmental changes noted in 
our discussions with management and our previous diagnostic review, we select ratios based on 
the latest two years of experience in an attempt to reflect the most current operating environment 
for XYZ Insurer. 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 4, we complete the square for both case outstanding and incremental paid 
claims. Projected ultimate claims using the case outstanding development technique are based on 
the cumulative paid claims through all maturities. We summarize projected ultimate claims in 
Column (4) of Exhibit II, Sheet 5 and calculate estimated IBNR and the total unpaid claim 
estimate in Columns (6) and (7), respectively. We compare the results of the case outstanding 
development technique method with the frequency-severity method, the Cape Cod method, the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, the expected claims method, and the development method in 
Exhibit II, Sheet 6 (projected ultimate claims) and in Exhibit II, Sheet 7 (estimated IBNR). 
 
 
When the Case Outstanding Development Technique Works and When it Does Not 
 
There are several limitations with the use of the case outstanding development technique. First, as 
noted earlier in this chapter, an important assumption underlying this method is that future IBNR 
is related to claims already reported. This assumption does not hold true for many P&C lines of 
insurance. Other limitations, also referred to earlier, are the infrequent use and the absence of 
benchmark data (for accident year applications of this method). Related to the infrequent use and 
267

=== PDF PAGE 274 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique 
 
 
absence of benchmarks is a lack of intuitive sense and experiential knowledge as to what ratios 
are appropriate at each maturity for both the incremental paid claims to previous case outstanding 
and the case outstanding to previous case outstanding across P&C lines of insurance. 
 
 
Case Outstanding Development Technique – Approach #2 
 
In our final example of this chapter, we assume that the only data available for our self-insurer is 
case outstanding. While this situation is not particularly common, it can occur, particularly for 
older years. The absence of historical cumulative paid claims can arise following times of 
transition such as mergers and acquisitions of corporations with self-insurance programs or 
consolidation or amalgamation of self-insured public entities. Some organizations create self-
insurance programs to address insurance coverage needs that are not readily met in the 
commercial market. Such organizations may have complete data for the years following the start 
of the formal self-insurance program; however, the only information that may be available for 
years prior to the commencement of the self-insurance program may be current case outstanding 
for claims in the process of investigation and settlement. 
 
 
Key Assumptions 
 
In this example (called Self-Insurer Case Only), we use the standard development technique with 
case outstanding to project an estimate of total unpaid claims for a self-insured entity of general 
liability coverage. In Chapter 7, we described the development technique and demonstrated its 
use with reported and paid claims. The key assumptions presented in Chapter 7 are equally 
applicable in our Self-Insurer Case Only example. We use industry-based reporting and payment 
development patterns to derive case outstanding development patterns. Thus, we implicitly 
assume that claims recorded to date for the self-insurer will develop in a similar manner in the 
future as our industry benchmark (i.e., the historical industry experience is indicative of the future 
experience for the self-insurer).  
 
 
Common Uses 
 
Similar to the case outstanding development technique Approach #1, Approach #2 is also not 
used extensively by actuaries. When used, it is most often due to the absence of other reliable 
claims data for the purpose of developing an unpaid claim estimate.  
 
 
Mechanics of the Method 
 
In our Self-Insurer Case Only example, there is no available data for historical paid claims. 
Therefore, we are not able to create paid or reported claim development triangles based on the 
self-insurer’s own experience. Instead we rely on insurance industry benchmark development 
patterns to project the general liability case outstanding values that are available. One important 
difference between the development technique applied to case outstanding and the development 
technique applied to reported claims and paid claims is that the projected values are estimates of 
unpaid claims and not ultimate claims.  
 
268

=== PDF PAGE 275 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 12 – Case Outstanding Development Technique 
 
 
The projection of the unpaid claim estimates for GL Self-Insurer Case Only is presented in 
Exhibit III. We use the benchmark reported and paid claim development factors to ultimate to 
derive the development factor for case outstanding. The following presents the formula for the 
case outstanding development factor: 
 
  (Reported CDF to Ultimate – 1.00) x (Paid CDF to Ultimate)  + 1.00 
                      (Paid CDF to Ultimate – Reported CDF to Ultimate) 
 
The resulting case development factor includes provisions for case outstanding and IBNR (the 
broad definition of IBNR, which includes development on known claims). The estimated unpaid 
claims for GL self-insurer are shown in Column (6) of Exhibit III and are equal to the current 
estimate of case outstanding multiplied by the derived case outstanding CDF to ultimate. 
 
 
Potential Limitations 
 
There are a few potential drawbacks of this case outstanding development approach. First, by its 
nature, this technique is used when historical claims experience specific to the insurer (or self-
insurer) is not available, and thus industry benchmarks development patterns are required. Such 
benchmarks may prove to be inaccurate in projecting future claims experience for the particular 
insurer. Furthermore, this technique is generally inappropriate for the more recent, less mature 
years due to the increased variability of results related to the highly leveraged nature of the 
derived development factors. Finally, individual large claims present in the case outstanding data 
can distort the results of projections based on this approach.
269

=== PDF PAGE 276 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 1
Case Outstanding and Incremental Paid Claims ($000)
Accident Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12  24  36  48  60  72  84  96  108  120
1998  18,478,233  9,937,970  5,506,911  2,892,519  1,440,783  767,842  413,097  242,778  169,222  98,117
1999  18,544,291  9,955,034  5,623,522  3,060,431  1,520,760  764,736  443,528  284,732  185,233
2000  19,034,933  10,395,464  5,969,194  3,217,937  1,567,806  842,849  457,854  304,704
2001  19,401,810  10,487,914  5,936,461  3,056,202  1,532,147  777,926  421,141
2002  20,662,461  11,176,330  6,198,509  3,350,967  1,609,188  785,497
2003  21,078,651  11,098,119  6,398,219  3,431,210  1,634,690
2004  21,047,539  11,150,459  6,316,995  3,201,985
2005  21,260,172  11,087,832  6,141,416
2006  20,973,908  11,034,842
2007  21,623,594
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12  24  36  48  60  72  84  96  108  120
1998 18,539,254    14,691,785    6,830,969      3,830,031      2,004,496      868,887         455,900         225,555         108,579         88,731           
1999 20,410,193    15,680,491    7,168,718      3,899,839      2,049,291      953,511         463,714         253,051         121,726         
2000 22,120,843    16,855,171    7,413,268      4,173,103      2,172,895      1,004,821      544,233         248,891         
2001 22,992,259    17,103,939    7,671,637      4,326,081      2,269,520      1,015,365      499,620         
2002 24,092,782    17,702,531    8,108,490      4,449,081      2,401,492      1,052,839      
2003 24,084,451    17,315,161    7,670,720      4,513,869      2,346,453      
2004 24,369,770    17,120,093    7,746,815      4,537,994      
2005 25,100,697    17,601,532    7,942,765      
2006 25,608,776    17,997,721    
2007 27,229,969    
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_1_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
270

=== PDF PAGE 277 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 2
Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding
Accident Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   To Ult
1998 0.795 0.687 0.695 0.693 0.603 0.594 0.546 0.447 0.524
1999 0.846 0.720 0.693 0.670 0.627 0.606 0.571 0.428
2000 0.885 0.713 0.699 0.675 0.641 0.646 0.544
2001 0.882 0.731 0.729 0.743 0.663 0.642
2002 0.857 0.726 0.718 0.717 0.654
2003 0.821 0.691 0.705 0.684
2004 0.813 0.695 0.718
2005 0.828 0.716
2006 0.858
2007
Averages of the Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.836 0.712 0.714 0.698 0.638 0.622 0.553 0.437 0.524
  Latest 3 0.833 0.701 0.714 0.714 0.653 0.631 0.553 0.437 0.524
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.835 0.712 0.714 0.692 0.641 0.624 0.546 0.437 0.524
Selected Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   To Ult
Selected 0.833 0.701 0.714 0.714 0.653 0.631 0.553 0.437 0.524 1.100
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_1_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
271

=== PDF PAGE 278 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 3
Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding
Accident Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   To Ult
1998 0.538 0.554 0.525 0.498 0.533 0.538 0.588 0.697 0.580
1999 0.537 0.565 0.544 0.497 0.503 0.580 0.642 0.651
2000 0.546 0.574 0.539 0.487 0.538 0.543 0.666
2001 0.541 0.566 0.515 0.501 0.508 0.541
2002 0.541 0.555 0.541 0.480 0.488
2003 0.527 0.577 0.536 0.476
2004 0.530 0.567 0.507
2005 0.522 0.554
2006 0.526
2007
Averages of the Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding 
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.529 0.564 0.528 0.488 0.514 0.551 0.632 0.674 0.580
  Latest 3 0.526 0.566 0.528 0.486 0.511 0.555 0.632 0.674 0.580
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.527 0.562 0.530 0.488 0.515 0.542 0.642 0.674 0.580
Selected Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding 
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   To Ult
Selected 0.526 0.566 0.528 0.486 0.511 0.555 0.632 0.674 0.580 0.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_1_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
272

=== PDF PAGE 279 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 4
Projection of Paid Claims ($000)
Accident Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12  24  36  48  60  72  84  96  108  120 To Ult
1998  18,478,233  9,937,970  5,506,911  2,892,519  1,440,783  767,842  413,097  242,778  169,222  98,117 0
1999  18,544,291  9,955,034  5,623,522  3,060,431  1,520,760  764,736  443,528  284,732  185,233  107,435 0
2000  19,034,933  10,395,464  5,969,194  3,217,937  1,567,806  842,849  457,854  304,704  205,370  119,115 0
2001  19,401,810  10,487,914  5,936,461  3,056,202  1,532,147  777,926  421,141  266,161  179,393  104,048 0
2002  20,662,461  11,176,330  6,198,509  3,350,967  1,609,188  785,497  435,951  275,521  185,701  107,707 0
2003  21,078,651  11,098,119  6,398,219  3,431,210  1,634,690  835,327  463,606  292,999  197,481  114,539 0
2004  21,047,539  11,150,459  6,316,995  3,201,985  1,556,165  795,200  441,336  278,924  187,995  109,037 0
2005  21,260,172  11,087,832  6,141,416  3,242,668  1,575,936  805,304  446,943  282,468  190,384  110,422 0
2006  20,973,908  11,034,842  6,245,721  3,297,740  1,602,702  818,981  454,534  287,266  193,617  112,298 0
2007  21,623,594  11,374,010  6,437,690  3,399,100  1,651,963  844,153  468,505  296,095  199,568  115,749 0
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12  24  36  48  60  72  84  96  108  120 To Ult
1998  18,539,254  14,691,785  6,830,969  3,830,031  2,004,496  868,887  455,900  225,555  108,579  88,731  107,929
1999  20,410,193  15,680,491  7,168,718  3,899,839  2,049,291  953,511  463,714  253,051  121,726  97,062  118,179
2000  22,120,843  16,855,171  7,413,268  4,173,103  2,172,895  1,004,821  544,233  248,891  133,156  107,614  131,026
2001  22,992,259  17,103,939  7,671,637  4,326,081  2,269,520  1,015,365  499,620  232,891  116,312  94,002  114,452
2002  24,092,782  17,702,531  8,108,490  4,449,081  2,401,492  1,052,839  495,649  241,081  120,403  97,307  118,477
2003  24,084,451  17,315,161  7,670,720  4,513,869  2,346,453  1,067,453  527,091  256,374  128,041  103,480  125,993
2004  24,369,770  17,120,093  7,746,815  4,537,994  2,286,217  1,016,176  501,771  244,059  121,890  98,509  119,941
2005  25,100,697  17,601,532  7,942,765  4,384,971  2,315,265  1,029,087  508,147  247,160  123,439  99,761  121,465
2006  25,608,776  17,997,721  7,735,424  4,459,444  2,354,587  1,046,564  516,777  251,357  125,535  101,455  123,528
2007  27,229,969  18,012,454  7,973,181  4,596,511  2,426,958  1,078,732  532,661  259,083  129,394  104,574  127,324
Accident Cumulative Paid Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 12  24  36  48  60  72  84  96  108  120 To Ult
1998  18,539,254  33,231,039  40,062,008  43,892,039  45,896,535  46,765,422  47,221,322  47,446,877  47,555,456  47,644,187  47,752,116
1999  20,410,193  36,090,684  43,259,402  47,159,241  49,208,532  50,162,043  50,625,757  50,878,808  51,000,534  51,097,596  51,215,775
2000  22,120,843  38,976,014  46,389,282  50,562,385  52,735,280  53,740,101  54,284,334  54,533,225  54,666,381  54,773,995  54,905,021
2001  22,992,259  40,096,198  47,767,835  52,093,916  54,363,436  55,378,801  55,878,421  56,111,312  56,227,624  56,321,626  56,436,079
2002  24,092,782  41,795,313  49,903,803  54,352,884  56,754,376  57,807,215  58,302,864  58,543,944  58,664,347  58,761,654  58,880,132
2003  24,084,451  41,399,612  49,070,332  53,584,201  55,930,654  56,998,107  57,525,198  57,781,572  57,909,613  58,013,093  58,139,086
2004  24,369,770  41,489,863  49,236,678  53,774,672  56,060,889  57,077,065  57,578,836  57,822,895  57,944,785  58,043,294  58,163,235
2005  25,100,697  42,702,229  50,644,994  55,029,965  57,345,230  58,374,316  58,882,463  59,129,623  59,253,061  59,352,822  59,474,287
2006  25,608,776  43,606,497  51,341,921  55,801,366  58,155,952  59,202,517  59,719,294  59,970,651  60,096,186  60,197,641  60,321,169
2007  27,229,969  45,242,423  53,215,604  57,812,115  60,239,072  61,317,804  61,850,464  62,109,548  62,238,941  62,343,515  62,470,839
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_1_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
273

=== PDF PAGE 280 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit I
U.S. Industry Auto Sheet 5
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Unpaid Claim Estimate
Projected Case Based on Case Outstanding
Accident Claims at 12/31/07 Ultimate Outstanding Development Method
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/07 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  47,742,304  47,644,187  47,752,116  98,117  9,812  107,929
1999  51,185,767  51,000,534  51,215,775  185,233  30,008  215,241
2000  54,837,929  54,533,225  54,905,021  304,704  67,092  371,796
2001  56,299,562  55,878,421  56,436,079  421,141  136,517  557,658
2002  58,592,712  57,807,215  58,880,132  785,497  287,420  1,072,917
2003  57,565,344  55,930,654  58,139,086  1,634,690  573,742  2,208,432
2004  56,976,657  53,774,672  58,163,235  3,201,985  1,186,578  4,388,563
2005  56,786,410  50,644,994  59,474,287  6,141,416  2,687,877  8,829,293
2006  54,641,339  43,606,497  60,321,169  11,034,842  5,679,830  16,714,672
2007  48,853,563  27,229,969  62,470,839  21,623,594  13,617,276  35,240,870
Total  543,481,587  498,050,368  567,757,738  45,431,219  24,276,151  69,707,370
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on Best's Aggregates & Averages U.S. private passenger automobile experience.
(4) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 4.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(4) - (3)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_1_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
274

=== PDF PAGE 281 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Case Outstanding and Incremental Paid Claims ($000)
Accident Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  4,861  3,859  3,134  2,447  1,446  1,947  853  71 0
1999  8,589  6,544  5,668  4,347  1,732  1,583  649  479  290
2000  14,374  12,237  9,760  9,316  5,458  5,605  3,727  1,603  465
2001  10,288  10,052  8,703  7,969  9,818  6,046  1,471  278
2002  10,494  12,439  12,833  15,572  12,469  8,072  3,731
2003  7,908  10,755  17,671  17,702  9,726  5,052
2004  14,774  30,281  32,916  28,268  17,477
2005  25,631  35,213  43,268  30,629
2006  23,535  35,005  25,985
2007  15,948  19,867
2008  15,223
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  6,309  2,212  1,561  1,537  1,622  1,177  892  453  58
1999  4,666  5,195  4,110  4,156  3,906  1,478  635  446  225
2000  1,302  5,210  5,627  5,689  6,202  4,823  4,369  2,680  880
2001  1,539  4,413  6,367  6,289  5,778  6,703  5,980  1,450
2002  2,318  5,614  5,891  8,273  9,850  8,683  3,809
2003  1,743  4,497  6,443  10,209  11,613  4,815
2004  2,221  7,677  16,052  17,489  9,372
2005  3,043  9,176  14,854  12,953
2006  3,531  8,247  11,041
2007  3,529  8,336
2008  3,409
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_1 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
275

=== PDF PAGE 282 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding
Accident Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
1998 0.455 0.405 0.491 0.663 0.814 0.458 0.532 0.816
1999 0.605 0.628 0.733 0.899 0.854 0.401 0.688 0.469
2000 0.362 0.460 0.583 0.666 0.884 0.780 0.719 0.549
2001 0.429 0.633 0.723 0.725 0.683 0.989 0.985
2002 0.535 0.474 0.645 0.633 0.696 0.472
2003 0.569 0.599 0.578 0.656 0.495
2004 0.520 0.530 0.531 0.332
2005 0.358 0.422 0.299
2006 0.350 0.315
2007 0.523
2008
Averages of the Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.464 0.468 0.555 0.602 0.731 0.751 0.730 0.565 0.501 0.816
  Latest 2 0.437 0.369 0.415 0.494 0.596 0.730 0.852 0.618 0.501 0.816
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.467 0.475 0.585 0.651 0.754 0.765 0.766 0.549 0.501 0.816
Selected Ratio of Incremental Paid Claims to Previous Case Outstanding
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
Selected 0.437 0.369 0.415 0.494 0.596 0.730 0.852 0.618 0.501 0.816 1.100
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_2 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
276

=== PDF PAGE 283 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding
Accident Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
1998 0.794 0.812 0.781 0.591 1.346 0.438 0.084 0.000
1999 0.762 0.866 0.767 0.398 0.914 0.410 0.739 0.605
2000 0.851 0.798 0.954 0.586 1.027 0.665 0.430 0.290
2001 0.977 0.866 0.916 1.232 0.616 0.243 0.189
2002 1.185 1.032 1.213 0.801 0.647 0.462
2003 1.360 1.643 1.002 0.549 0.519
2004 2.050 1.087 0.859 0.618
2005 1.374 1.229 0.708
2006 1.487 0.742
2007 1.246
2008
Averages of the Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.503 1.147 0.940 0.757 0.642 0.575 0.594 0.489 0.344 0.000
  Latest 2 1.367 0.986 0.783 0.584 0.583 0.353 0.310 0.514 0.344 0.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.407 1.116 0.925 0.668 0.594 0.573 0.420 0.438 0.344 0.000
Selected Ratio of Case Outstanding to Previous Case Outstanding
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
Selected 1.367 0.986 0.783 0.584 0.583 0.353 0.310 0.514 0.344 0.000 0.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
277

=== PDF PAGE 284 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Projection of Paid Claims ($000)
Accident Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
1998  4,861  3,859  3,134  2,447  1,446  1,947  853  71 0 0
1999  8,589  6,544  5,668  4,347  1,732  1,583  649  479  290 0 0
2000  14,374  12,237  9,760  9,316  5,458  5,605  3,727  1,603  465  160 0 0
2001  10,288  10,052  8,703  7,969  9,818  6,046  1,471  278  143  49 0 0
2002  10,494  12,439  12,833  15,572  12,469  8,072  3,731  1,155  594  204 0 0
2003  7,908  10,755  17,671  17,702  9,726  5,052  1,782  552  284  98 0 0
2004  14,774  30,281  32,916  28,268  17,477  10,197  3,597  1,114  573  197 0 0
2005  25,631  35,213  43,268  30,629  17,882  10,433  3,681  1,140  586  202 0 0
2006  23,535  35,005  25,985  20,355  11,884  6,934  2,446  757  390  134 0 0
2007  15,948  19,867  19,579  15,337  8,955  5,224  1,843  571  294  101 0 0
2008  15,223  20,803  20,502  16,060  9,376  5,471  1,930  598  307  106 0 0
Accident Incremental Paid Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
1998  6,309  2,212  1,561  1,537  1,622  1,177  892  453  58 0
1999  4,666  5,195  4,110  4,156  3,906  1,478  635  446  225  237 0
2000  1,302  5,210  5,627  5,689  6,202  4,823  4,369  2,680  880 0  130 0
2001  1,539  4,413  6,367  6,289  5,778  6,703  5,980  1,450  172  72  40 0
2002  2,318  5,614  5,891  8,273  9,850  8,683  3,809  3,180  714  297  167 0
2003  1,743  4,497  6,443  10,209  11,613  4,815  3,690  1,519  341  142  80 0
2004  2,221  7,677  16,052  17,489  9,372  10,412  7,448  3,066  689  287  161 0
2005  3,043  9,176  14,854  12,953  15,123  10,654  7,621  3,137  704  293  165 0
2006  3,531  8,247  11,041  10,793  10,051  7,080  5,064  2,085  468  195  109 0
2007  3,529  8,336  7,323  8,132  7,573  5,335  3,816  1,571  353  147  82 0
2008  3,409  6,646  7,668  8,516  7,930  5,586  3,996  1,645  369  154  86 0
Accident Cumulative Paid Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   To Ult
1998  6,309  8,521  10,082  11,620  13,242  14,419  15,311  15,764  15,822  15,822
1999  4,666  9,861  13,971  18,127  22,032  23,511  24,146  24,592  24,817  25,054  25,054
2000  1,302  6,513  12,139  17,828  24,030  28,853  33,222  35,902  36,782  36,782  36,912  36,912
2001  1,539  5,952  12,319  18,609  24,387  31,090  37,070  38,519  38,691  38,763  38,803  38,803
2002  2,318  7,932  13,822  22,095  31,945  40,629  44,437  47,618  48,332  48,629  48,796  48,796
2003  1,743  6,240  12,683  22,892  34,505  39,320  43,011  44,530  44,871  45,013  45,093  45,093
2004  2,221  9,898  25,950  43,439  52,811  63,223  70,671  73,737  74,426  74,712  74,873  74,873
2005  3,043  12,219  27,073  40,026  55,150  65,803  73,424  76,561  77,265  77,559  77,723  77,723
2006  3,531  11,778  22,819  33,612  43,663  50,743  55,807  57,892  58,360  58,555  58,665  58,665
2007  3,529  11,865  19,188  27,321  34,894  40,229  44,045  45,616  45,968  46,115  46,198  46,198
2008  3,409  10,055  17,723  26,239  34,169  39,755  43,751  45,395  45,765  45,919  46,005  46,005
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_4 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
278

=== PDF PAGE 285 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Unpaid Claim Estimate
Projected Case Based on Case Outstanding
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Ultimate Outstanding Development Method
Year Reported Paid Claims at 12/31/08 IBNR Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822 0 0 0
1999  25,107  24,817  25,054  290 - 53  237
2000  37,246  36,782  36,912  465 - 334  130
2001  38,798  38,519  38,803  278  6  284
2002  48,169  44,437  48,796  3,731  627  4,359
2003  44,373  39,320  45,093  5,052  720  5,772
2004  70,288  52,811  74,873  17,477  4,585  22,062
2005  70,655  40,026  77,723  30,629  7,068  37,697
2006  48,804  22,819  58,665  25,985  9,861  35,846
2007  31,732  11,865  46,198  19,867  14,466  34,333
2008  18,632  3,409  46,005  15,223  27,373  42,596
Total  449,626  330,629  513,944  118,997  64,318  183,315
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) = [(2) - (3)].
(6) = [(4) - (2)].
(7) = [(4) - (3)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_5 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
279

=== PDF PAGE 286 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 6
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape Frequency-Severity Case O/S
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Dev.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,660  15,822  15,977  15,822  15,822  15,822
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  24,665  25,107  25,158  25,107  25,082  25,054
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  35,235  37,246  37,841  37,246  37,083  36,912
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  39,150  38,798  40,525  38,798  38,778  39,192  38,803
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  47,906  48,312  49,417  48,313  48,655  46,869  48,796
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  54,164  45,068  50,768  45,062  46,107  44,479  45,093
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  86,509  75,492  82,593  74,754  76,620  71,906  74,873
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  108,172  79,129  94,301  77,931  80,745  71,684  77,723
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  70,786  60,404  71,205  58,759  64,505  49,913  58,665
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  39,835  45,221  45,636  43,307  58,516  30,512  31,805  46,198
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  39,433  42,607  41,049  39,201  59,242  30,140  29,828  46,005
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  561,516  513,207  554,471  504,300  551,155  513,944
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(7) and (8) Developed in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(9) Developed in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(10) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit II, Sheet 6.
(11) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(12) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit VI, Sheet 7.
(13) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_6 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
280

=== PDF PAGE 287 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 7
Summary of IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR
Accident Outstanding Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape Frequency-Severity Case O/S
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Dev.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
1998 0 0  158 - 162 0  155 0 0 0
1999  290 - 25  58 - 442 0  51 0 - 25 - 53
2000  465 - 298  676 - 2,011 0  595 0 - 163 - 334
2001  278 - 310  1,802  352 0  1,728 0 - 19  394  6
2002  3,731  145  1,423 - 262  143  1,248  144  486 - 1,300  627
2003  5,052  577  5,485  9,791  695  6,396  690  1,734  106  720
2004  17,477  4,498  10,249  16,221  5,204  12,305  4,466  6,331  1,618  4,585
2005  30,629  6,006  9,678  37,517  8,474  23,646  7,276  10,090  1,029  7,068
2006  25,985  9,566  23,304  21,982  11,600  22,401  9,955  15,701  1,109  9,861
2007  19,867  16,247  46,209  8,103  13,489  13,904  11,575  26,784 - 1,220  73  14,466
2008  15,223  28,898  56,363  20,801  23,975  22,417  20,569  40,610  11,508  11,196  27,373
Total  118,997  65,303  155,405  111,890  63,581  104,845  54,674  101,529  64,318
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) and (4) Estimated in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) Estimated in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
(6) and (7) Estimated in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(8) Estimated in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(9) Estimated in Chapter 11, Exhibit II, Sheet 7.
(10) Estimated in Chapter 11, Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(11) Estimated in Chapter 11, Exhibit VI, Sheet 8.
(12) Estimated in Exhibit II, Sheet 5.
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_2_7 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
281

=== PDF PAGE 288 ===
Chapter 12 - Case Outstanding Development Technique Exhibit III
Self-Insurer Case Outstanding Only - General Liability
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Case CDF to Ultimate Unpaid
Accident Outstanding Case Claim
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Outstanding Estimate
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
1998  500,000 1.015 1.046 1.506  753,000
1999  650,000 1.020 1.067 1.454  945,100
2000  800,000 1.030 1.109 1.421  1,136,800
2001  850,000 1.051 1.187 1.445  1,228,250
2002  975,000 1.077 1.306 1.439  1,403,025
2003  1,000,000 1.131 1.489 1.545  1,545,000
Total  4,775,000  7,011,175
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from Self-Insurer Case Outstanding Only.
(3) and (4) From Exhibit I, Sheet 2 in Chapter 8.
(5) = {[((3) - 1) x (4)] / ((4) - (3))} + 1.
(6) = [(2) x (5)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 12_3 04/03/2009 - 2:59 PM
282

=== PDF PAGE 289 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
CHAPTER 13 – BERQUIST-SHERMAN TECHNIQUES 
 
 
We have already referred frequently to the pivotal paper by Berquist and Sherman “Loss Reserve 
Adequacy Testing: A Comprehensive, Systematic Approach.”
72 This paper, which continues to be 
invaluable to actuaries more than 30 years after its publication, addresses many important issues 
for actuaries conducting analyses of unpaid claims.  
 
One of the many valuable contributions that arose from this paper was a methodical actuarial 
approach for analyzing unpaid claims for insurers who had undergone changes in operations and 
procedures. Berquist and Sherman present two alternatives for the actuary in addressing such 
situations: 
 
 Treat problem areas through data selection and rearrangement 
 Treat problem areas through data adjustment 
 
 
Reacting to a Changing Environment through Data Selection and Rearrangement 
 
Berquist and Sherman recommend that, wherever possible, the actuary should use data that is 
relatively unaffected by changes in the insurer’s claims and underwriting procedures and 
operations. For example, if the insurer has experienced a change in its approach to the 
establishment of opening case outstanding, then the actuary may place greater reliance on 
methods using paid claims that will be unaffected by the changes in case outstanding. Berquist 
and Sherman cite the following examples for selecting alternative data to respond to potential 
problems related to a changing environment: 
 
 Using earned exposures instead of the number of claims when claim count data is of 
questionable accuracy or if there has been a major change in the definition of a claim 
count. 
 
 Substituting policy year data for accident year data when there has been a significant 
change in policy limits or deductibles between successive policy years. 
 
 Substituting report year data for accident year data when there has been a dramatic 
shift in the social or legal climate that causes claim severity to more closely correlate 
with the report year than with the accident date. 
 
 Substituting accident quarter for accident year when the rate of growth of earned 
exposures changes markedly, causing distortions in development factors due to 
significant shifts in the average accident date within each exposure period. 
 
Another way to adjust the data for changes in operations is to divide the data into more 
homogeneous groups. This approach may be particularly valuable when there have been changes 
in the composition of business by jurisdiction, coverage, class, territory, or size of risk. We recall 
from Chapter 6, the discussion of homogeneity and credibility of data. While dividing the data 
into more homogeneous groups, the actuary must seek to retain sufficient volume of experience 
within each grouping to ensure the credibility of the data. 
                                                 
72 PCAS, 1977. 
283

=== PDF PAGE 290 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
Berquist and Sherman also discuss the value of grouping claims data according to the size of the 
claim. A shift in emphasis by the claims department affecting its propensity to settle large claims 
versus small claims is an example of an operational change that could affect many types of data 
that actuaries typically use for estimating unpaid claims. For example, greater attention to large 
claims could result in an overall slowdown in the rate of total claim settlements. If claims 
adjusters focus on the larger claims, which are typically fewer in number, more complex, and 
require a longer period of time to settle than small claims, the small claims may not be settled at 
the same rate as in the past. Furthermore, with greater attention directed at the handling of large 
claims, there may be a speed-up in the settlement of these particular claims that could affect both 
the paid claims and case outstanding triangles; if the large claims are settled earlier then the case 
outstanding will no longer be present in the triangle at the later maturities and the payments will 
appear in the triangles at earlier maturities than in the past. Also, without appropriate attention, 
the smaller claims may become larger claims more quickly than past experience would suggest. 
 
 
Treat Problem Areas through Data Adjustment 
 
In some circumstances, the actuary is not able to sufficiently address the effect of changes in 
operations through data selection and rearrangement. In these situations, Berquist and Sherman 
introduce two techniques for quantitative adjustments to the data prior to application of traditional 
development techniques. The first technique adjusts the case outstanding triangle when there have 
been changes in the adequacy of case outstanding. The second technique adjusts the paid claim 
triangle where there have been changes in the rate of claims settlement.  
 
In the discussion below we use the same examples that were presented in the 1977 paper by 
Berquist and Sherman. The first example is for a portfolio of U.S. medical malpractice insurance 
for an experience period of 1969 to 1976 (Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer); and the second example 
is a portfolio of automobile bodily injury liability also for an experience period of 1969 to 1976 
(Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer). Notwithstanding the dated nature of these examples, the concepts 
are equally applicable to insurers operating today. Later in this chapter, we use the Berquist-
Sherman adjustments to project ultimate claims for XYZ Insurer. 
 
 
Detecting Changes in the Adequacy Level of Case Outstanding and Reducing the Effect 
of Such Changes on Reported Claims Projections 
 
We present the analysis for Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer in Exhibit I, Sheets 1 through 10. In  
Exhibit I, Sheet 1, we present the unadjusted reported claim development triangle. Berquist and 
Sherman use the simple average for all years to project ultimate claims. In Exhibit I, Sheet 2, we 
show the unadjusted paid claim triangle; for paid claims, Berquist and Sherman use the volume-
weighted average for all years to project ultimate claims. In Exhibit I, Sheet 3, we project the 
unadjusted reported and unadjusted paid claims to an ultimate basis. There are significant 
differences in these projections by accident year and in total. It is worth noting that while Berquist 
and Sherman show the paid claim development method in this example for demonstration purposes, 
it is not a reliable projection method due to the highly leveraged nature of the cumulative 
development factors for almost every accident year in the experience period. (The format of  
Exhibit I, Sheet 3 is similar to that presented in the preceding chapters.) 
 
 
284

=== PDF PAGE 291 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
Testing the Assumptions of the Reported Claim Development Technique 
 
We recall that the underlying assumption of the reported claim development technique is that 
claims reported to date will continue to develop in a similar manner in the future. Thus, we 
assume that the adequacy of the case outstanding is not changing over time or at least is relatively 
stable other than inflationary pressures. If there has been a change in the adequacy of case 
outstanding over the experience period, then the fundamental assumption of the development 
method does not hold and the method will most likely not produce reliable results of ultimate 
claims or unpaid claims. 
 
It is very important that the actuary test the appropriateness of underlying assumptions prior to 
relying on the results of any particular method. There are several approaches that an actuary can 
use to determine if an insurer has sustained changes in case outstanding adequacy. As we discuss 
in Chapter 6, one of the most important sources of information for the actuary is the claims 
department management of the insurer. A meeting with claims department management to 
discuss the claims process should be a prerequisite to any analysis of unpaid claims. The actuary 
can also calculate various claim development diagnostic tests, including: the ratio of paid-to-
reported claims, average case outstanding, average reported claim, and average paid claims. In 
their medical malpractice example, Berquist and Sherman compare the annual change in the 
average case outstanding to the annual change in the average paid claims to confirm a shift in 
case outstanding adequacy. 
 
We begin our testing of the underlying assumptions in Exhibit I, Sheet 4 with a review of the 
average case outstanding triangle. (Note that the average case outstanding triangle is the 
unadjusted case outstanding divided by the open claim counts in Exhibit I, Sheet 4.) When we 
look down each column, we observe that the two latest points are significantly higher than the 
preceding values at each maturity age (i.e., the latest two diagonals are higher than prior 
diagonals). For example, at 24 months, the average case outstanding values for the last two 
accident years are $22,477 and $32,160 compared to $13,785 and $11,433 for the preceding two 
accident years. 
 
We use an exponential regression analysis to determine the annual trend rate in the average case 
outstanding at each maturity age. We fit the average case outstanding at each maturity age with 
the accident year. At the bottom of Exhibit I, Sheet 4, we present the fitted trend rate and the R-
squared test for each maturity age. The R-squared test provides an indication of the goodness of 
the exponential fit for each maturity age. We observe annual trend rates of roughly 30% for 
maturity ages 24 months through 72 months with R-squared values of 85% or greater for all of 
these ages.
73 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 5, we continue our testing by calculating the ratios of paid-to-reported claims 
and reviewing the trend rates inherent in the average paid claim triangle. If there had been an 
increase in the case outstanding adequacy level, which seems apparent based on a review of the 
average case outstanding triangle, we would expect the ratios of paid-to-reported claims to be 
decreasing along the latest two diagonals of the triangle. While we see some decreases in this 
ratio triangle, there is substantial variability and it is hard to draw definitive conclusions based on 
this diagnostic alone. 
 
                                                 
73 We again remind the reader that the results of regression analyses with limited data points must be used 
with caution. 
285

=== PDF PAGE 292 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
The test that Berquist and Sherman used to determine that there had been an increase in case 
outstanding adequacy is a comparison of the annual trend rates, based on regression analysis, of 
the average case outstanding and the average paid claims on closed counts. Since medical 
malpractice tends to be a line of business where partial payments are not common, the paid claim 
triangle can be used with the closed claim counts triangle to approximate the average paid claims 
on closed counts. At the bottom of Exhibit I, Sheet 5, we reproduce the average paid claims on 
closed count triangle from the Berquist-Sherman paper.  
 
When we compare the annual rates of change between average case outstanding and average paid 
claims, we observe very different trend indications. The annual trend rate appears to be 
approximately 30% based on a review of the average case outstanding triangle; however, using 
the average paid claim triangle, the annual trend rate indications range from approximately 7% to 
14%. Berquist and Sherman note that the observed trends for average paid claims are similar to 
industry benchmarks (at the time), and thus they conclude that the higher trends for average case 
outstanding are indicative of changes in case outstanding adequacy. 
 
 
Mechanics of the Berquist-Sherman Case Outstanding Adjustment  
 
The mechanics of the Berquist-Sherman adjustment for changes in case outstanding adequacy are 
fairly straightforward. There are, however, two decisions requiring judgment by the actuary. First, 
the actuary must choose a diagonal from which he or she will calculate all other values of the 
adjusted average case outstanding triangle. For this purpose, the most prevalent choice tends to be 
the latest diagonal of the average case outstanding triangle. An advantage of selecting these 
average case outstanding values is that the latest diagonal of the adjusted reported claim triangle 
will not change from the unadjusted data triangle. Second, the actuary must select an annual 
severity trend to adjust the average case outstanding values from the selected diagonal to all other 
accident year-maturity age cells in the triangle. 
 
In the medical malpractice example, Berquist and Sherman selected the latest diagonal as the 
starting point and a 15% annual severity trend. (The annual trend rate was based on a review of 
the historical experience for the specific insurer as well as overall insurance industry experience 
at the time.) In Exhibit I, Sheet 6, we present the adjusted average case outstanding triangle. The 
last diagonal does not change from the unadjusted average case outstanding triangle which we 
present in Exhibit I, Sheet 4. However, we now derive all other values by formula; these shaded 
values differ from the original triangle. The calculations proceed within each column starting with 
the latest point and the selected severity trend rate. For example, the 1975 adjusted average case 
outstanding at 12 months of $11,329 is equal to the 1976 average case outstanding at 12 months 
of $13,028 divided by 1.15
1, which represents one year of trend. Similarly, we calculate the 1970 
adjusted average case outstanding at 48 months of $21,873 based on the 1973 average case 
outstanding of $33,266 divided by 1.15
3, which represents three years of trend. 
 
The intent of these calculations is to restate the average case outstanding triangle so that each 
diagonal in the triangle is at the same case outstanding adequacy level as the latest diagonal (i.e., 
latest valuation). To determine the adjusted reported claims, we multiply the adjusted average 
case outstanding by the number of open claims and then add the unadjusted paid claims. In 
Exhibit I, Sheet 7, we analyze the adjusted reported claim triangle and select development factors 
for each age-to-age maturity. At the bottom of this exhibit, we compare the selected development 
factors from the unadjusted reported claim triangle to those selected for the adjusted reported 
claim triangle. We note that the selected development factor is lower based on adjusted data than 
on unadjusted data for all age-to-age maturities except 12-to-24 months. This is consistent with 
286

=== PDF PAGE 293 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
our belief that the case outstanding adequacy had increased in recent years and an unadjusted 
reported claim development projection would overstate future claim development. 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 8, we repeat the claim development projections based on unadjusted reported 
and paid claims data. We also add the projection based on the adjusted reported claims. As 
expected, the projected ultimate claims based on the adjusted reported claim triangle are 
significantly less than the ultimate claims produced by the unadjusted data. To demonstrate the 
significant effect on the estimate of unpaid claims of this type of data adjustment, we calculate 
estimated IBNR and the total unpaid claim estimate in Exhibit I, Sheet 9 using all three projection 
methods (i.e., unadjusted reported claims, unadjusted paid claims, and adjusted reported claims). 
We summarize the totals in the following table. 
 
 
Claims Data Type 
Estimated IBNR 
Total All Years ($ millions) 
Total Unpaid Claim Estimate 
Total All Years ($ millions) 
Unadjusted Reported 470 747 
Unadjusted Paid 284 560 
Adjusted Reported 154 431 
 
Because these three methods produce such dramatically different results, the actuary would likely 
seek alternative methods and additional information to determine which is, in fact, the most 
appropriate estimate of unpaid claims or whether another estimation method may be more 
appropriate. In many situations, actuaries summarize the results of numerous methodologies and 
select a final estimate of unpaid claims that they believe is most appropriate based on the 
insurer’s particular circumstances. (See Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques for further 
discussion.) 
 
 
Potential Difficulty with the Adjustment 
 
In his review of the Berquist and Sherman paper, Joseph Thorne comments on the importance of 
the estimation of the underlying trend in severity. He states: “The estimation of the underlying 
trend in severity requires much care due to the sensitivity of the reserve estimates to the selected 
rate, and due to the substantial judgment often necessary.”
74 In his review, he presents a graph 
depicting the sensitivity of the unpaid claim estimate to the assumed rate of growth in the average 
outstanding claim cost. We reproduce this graph in Exhibit I, Sheet 10. He notes that estimating 
severity trends for medical malpractice is complicated by the following factors: 
 
 The slow payment of claims substantially reduces the data available by accident year (less 
than 3% of ultimate claims are paid during the first 24 months and less than 30% during the 
first 60 months) 
 
 Severity trends can be distorted by irregular settlements and variation in the rate of claims 
closed without payment 
 
He concludes: “The degree of judgment necessary in the estimation of the severity trend makes 
this substantial effect on the loss reserve estimate particularly critical.” While the CAS published 
Thorne’s review in 1978, his comments are equally applicable today. 
 
                                                 
74 PCAS, 1978 
287

=== PDF PAGE 294 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
Detecting Changes in the Rate of Settlement of Claims and Adjusting Paid Claims for 
Such Changes 
 
Berquist and Sherman also present a technique to adjust the paid claim development method for 
changes in settlement rates. We reproduce the Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer example in Exhibit II, 
Sheets 1 through 12. In Exhibit II, Sheet 1, we present the unadjusted paid claim development 
triangle analysis; we include this analysis for comparison purposes with the Berquist-Sherman 
adjusted paid claim triangle. Berquist and Sherman use the volume-weighted average for all years 
to project ultimate claims.  
 
Similar to the previous example, we test the data to determine if the rate of claims settlement is 
consistent for the reviewed line over the experience period (i.e., the underlying assumption of the 
paid claim development technique). In Exhibit II, Sheet 2, we summarize closed and reported 
claim counts and the ratio of closed-to-reported claim counts. When we look down each column 
of the ratio triangle, we readily see evidence of a steady decrease in the rate of claim settlement 
over the experience period. Thus, the primary assumption of the paid claim development method 
does not appear to hold true for Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer, and the method would likely 
understate the true value required for unpaid claims. 
 
 
Mechanics of the Berquist-Sherman Paid Claim Development Adjustment 
 
The first step of the Berquist-Sherman paid claims adjustment is to determine the disposal rates 
by accident year and maturity. Berquist and Sherman use the same definition of disposal rates as 
that presented in the final frequency-severity approach of Chapter 11. (It is worthwhile to note 
that the definition of disposal rate differs among different authors in published actuarial papers.) 
To determine the disposal rates, we first project the number of ultimate claims based on reported 
claim counts (Exhibit II, Sheets 3 and 4). The disposal rate is equal to the cumulative closed 
claim counts for each accident year-maturity age cell divided by the ultimate claim counts for the 
particular accident year. Upon review of the disposal rates (top part of Exhibit II, Sheet 5), we see 
evidence of a decrease in the rate of claims settlement for Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer. 
 
Berquist and Sherman select the claims disposal rate along the latest diagonal as the basis for 
adjusting the closed claim count triangle. An advantage of selecting the latest diagonal as the 
starting point is that the latest diagonal of the adjusted paid claim triangle will not change from 
the unadjusted paid claim triangle.  
 
We multiply the selected disposal rate for each maturity by the ultimate number of claims to 
determine the adjusted triangle of closed claim counts. For example, the adjusted closed claim 
counts for accident year 1974 at 12 months of 3,379
75 is equal to the selected disposal rate at 12 
months of 0.433 multiplied by the projected ultimate claim counts for accident year 1974 of 
7,803. Similarly, the adjusted closed claim counts for accident year 1971 at 60 months of 9,716
76 
is equal to the selected disposal rate at 60 months of 0.977 multiplied by the projected ultimate 
claim counts for accident year 1971 of 9,945. The last diagonal in the adjusted closed claim count 
triangle in Exhibit II, Sheet 5 is the same as the unadjusted closed claim count triangle presented 
                                                 
75 Note, slight differences which exist between values in the text and values in the exhibits are due to the 
fact that the exhibits carry a greater number of decimals than shown. 
 
76 Note, slight differences which exist between values in the text and values in the exhibits are due to the 
fact that the exhibits carry a greater number of decimals than shown. 
288

=== PDF PAGE 295 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
in Exhibit II, Sheet 2. We highlight all other values in the triangle to indicate that they are 
adjusted, not actual values. 
 
Berquist and Sherman then use regression analysis to identify a mathematical formula that 
approximates the relationship between the cumulative number of closed claims (X) and 
cumulative paid claims (Y). Using the automobile BI data, Berquist and Sherman find that a curve 
of the form Y = ae
(bX) fits exceptionally well. We conduct the regression analysis for the oldest 
three accident years. In Exhibit II, Sheet 6, we present the results of this analysis for accident 
years 1969, 1970, and 1971, including the R-squared value and the estimated a and b values. 
 
Since exponential curves closely approximate the relationship between cumulative closed claim 
counts and cumulative paid claims, Berquist and Sherman suggest that fitting exponential curves 
for every pair of two successive points is appropriate as the basis for adjusting paid claims. For 
ease of illustration, we reproduce triangles for unadjusted closed claim counts, unadjusted paid 
claims, and adjusted closed claim counts on the left side of Exhibit II, Sheet 7. We show the 
estimated parameters a and b for all two-point exponential regressions on the right side. For 
example, the exponential regression for accident year 1969 between ages 12 and 24, such that X = 
(4,079; 6,616) and Y = (1,904; 5,398), would result in a = 356 and b = 0.000411, which we place 
in the age 24 cell. 
 
After estimating all parameter values, we can then proceed with adjusting the paid claims. We 
adjust paid claims based on the modifications that we have made to the closed claim count 
triangle earlier. In general, there are three kinds of treatments: no adjustment, interpolation, and 
extrapolation. Since adjusted closed claim counts are the same as unadjusted closed claim counts 
along the latest diagonal, the latest diagonal of the paid claim triangle does not require any 
adjustment. If the number of adjusted closed claims is within the range of any regression in its 
specific accident year, we use interpolation. For example, accident year 1970 at age 48 has 8,231 
adjusted closed claims, which is within the range of unadjusted closed claims between ages 36 
and 48 (7,899; 8,291), then the paid claims for accident year 1970 at age 48 would be adjusted 
based on such regression with a = 215 and b = 0.000468. Therefore, the adjusted paid claims for 
accident year 1970 at age 48 are equal to {215 x [e
(0.000468 x 8,231)]} = 10,156. On the other hand, if 
the number of adjusted closed claims is not within the range of all regression in its specific 
accident year, then extrapolation would be used to the regression that has the closest range. For 
example, accident year 1969 at age 12 has 3,383 adjusted closed claim counts, in which the 
regression between ages 12 and 24 has the closest unadjusted closed claim count range (4,079; 
6,616) among all regressions in year 1969. Therefore, the adjusted paid claims for year 1969 at 
age 12 is calculated as {356 x [e(0.000411 x 3,383)]} = 1,431. 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 8, we analyze the adjusted paid claim development triangle and select 
development factors for each age-to-age maturity. At the bottom of this exhibit, we compare the 
selected development factors from the unadjusted paid claim triangle to those selected for the 
adjusted paid claim triangle. For both the adjusted and unadjusted paid claim development 
triangles, we select factors based on the volume-weighted average for all years. We note that at 
all age-to-age maturities except 72-to-84 and 84-to-96 months, the selected development factors 
are higher based on the adjusted data than on the unadjusted data. This is consistent with our 
belief that the rate of claims settlement has decreased in recent years and an unadjusted paid 
claim development projection would understate future claim development and the estimate of 
unpaid claims. 
 
In their 1977 paper, Berquist and Sherman present numerous alternatives for the derivation of 
claim development factors. We continue the example for Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer with two 
289

=== PDF PAGE 296 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
additional approaches for determining claim development factors for the adjusted paid claim 
triangle. The first approach, presented in Exhibit II, Sheet 9, is based on a linear regression of the 
claim development factors at each maturity age with the accident year. We show the Y intercepts, 
slope, and R-squared values for each maturity age. The second approach, shown in Exhibit II, 
Sheet 10, is similar to the first except that the development factors are derived using an 
exponential regression analysis rather than a linear regression analysis. As we see in the middle 
section of both Sheets, the R-squared values are never greater than 75% for any maturity age. We 
use the extrapolated claim development factors to complete the age-to-age triangles in order to 
derive the ultimate claim development factor for each accident year.
77 
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 11, we project ultimate claims based on the unadjusted and adjusted paid 
claim development triangles. The projections based on the unadjusted paid claim triangle rely on 
the all-year volume-weighted average age-to-age factors. For the adjusted paid claims, we project 
claims using the all-year volume-weighted average as well as the development factors derived 
from the linear and exponential regression analyses. In Exhibit II, Sheet 12, we calculate the 
unpaid claim estimates based on the results of the four claims projections. The estimated IBNR 
based on the adjusted paid claims projections are relatively close to one another; these estimates 
are all roughly $10 million greater than the estimates from the unadjusted development technique. 
 
 
Potential Difficulty with the Adjustment 
 
A key assumption in the Berquist-Sherman paid claims adjustment is that a higher percentage of 
closed claim counts relative to ultimate claim counts is associated with a higher percentage of 
ultimate claims paid. Joseph O. Thorne, in his review of the Berquist-Sherman paper, notes: 
“Lack of recognition of the settlement patterns by size of loss can be an important source of error 
… it may be necessary to modify the technique to  apply to size of loss categories adjusted for 
‘inflation’.” Thorne presents a detailed example in which the number of small claims (limited to 
$3,000) is steadily decreasing and the number of larger claims (limited to $20,000) is steadily 
increasing. He shows that the percentage of closed claim counts decreases and yet the percentage 
of paid claims increases due to the shift to settling larger claims. Thus, he notes that the Berquist-
Sherman technique actually adjusts paid claims to be less comparable among accident years and 
increases the error in the estimate of unpaid claims. He concludes: “Although the example is 
hypothetical, it was selected recognizing the recent trend toward an increasing proportion of 
severe, late closing claims in many lines of business and demonstrates the hazards of not 
recognizing settlement patterns by size of loss.”
78 
 
 
                                                 
77 We note that actuaries must take care when extrapolating development patterns particularly for high 
maturity ages where data is thin. For volatile age-to-age factors, extrapolation can lead to unreasonable 
estimates of age-to-age factors. 
 
78 PCAS, 1978. 
290

=== PDF PAGE 297 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
In previous chapters, we discuss the numerous operational and environmental changes that XYZ 
Insurer has been subject to in recent years. Therefore, we conclude that both Berquist-Sherman 
adjustments are appropriate for XYZ Insurer. For this example, we prepare three separate 
projections: 
 
 Adjustment due to changes in case outstanding adequacy only 
 Adjustment for changes in settlement rate only 
 Adjustments for both the change in case outstanding adequacy and settlement rates 
 
The first step of the adjustment for changes in case outstanding adequacy is the determination of 
the severity trend rate. In Exhibit III, Sheet 1, we analyze the average paid claims (using 
unadjusted data). We perform exponential regression analyses at each maturity age. Based on this 
analysis and our knowledge of the insurance industry’s experience for this line of business, we 
select a 5% severity trend rate for XYZ Insurer. We do not observe any significant differences in 
the trend rate by maturity age for ages 24 through 72 months; thus, we use the 5% severity trend 
rate for all maturities. 
 
In the top part of Exhibit III, Sheet 2, we present the adjusted average case outstanding triangle. 
We use the latest diagonal as the starting point and the selected 5% severity trend rate to develop 
this triangle. In the bottom part of Exhibit III, Sheet 2, we summarize the adjusted reported claim 
development triangle. Adjusted reported claims are equal to the adjusted average case outstanding 
triangle multiplied by the number of open claims and then added to the paid claims for each 
accident year-maturity age cell. We follow this approach for ages 12 months through 84 months.  
 
For the most mature ages (i.e., ages 96 months through 132 months), we judgmentally assume 
that the unadjusted reported claim triangle is appropriate without any adjustment, although the 
method can be applied to all claim maturities. For claims at these older maturities, we expect that 
the claims department has complete information and thus the case outstanding amounts for these 
claims are adequate. This is an example of how actuarial judgment influences the application of a 
mechanical projection methodology for a specific insurer. 
 
We analyze the adjusted reported claim development triangle (case adjustment only) in Exhibit 
III, Sheet 3. At the 12-to-24 month interval, we observe a persistent downward trend in the age-
to-age factors. A similar pattern, though not quite as pronounced, also exists at 24 months. This 
leads us to question whether or not the trend rate is appropriate, particularly for these two 
maturity ages. We also return to an issue raised earlier about a potential shift in the type of claim 
that is now closed at 12 and 24 months. This could have a distorting effect on this projection 
methodology.  
 
We select claim development factors based on the volume-weighted three-year average to 
recognize the decreasing age-to-age factors in the most recent diagonals. We compare the 
estimated average age-to-age factors with our selected factors based on the unadjusted reported 
claim triangle (from Chapter 7). As expected, the estimated average age-to-age factors for most 
maturities are less than those based on the unadjusted claims. This is consistent with our 
expectation since we believe that case outstanding strengthening has occurred at XYZ Insurer; 
thus, an unadjusted reported claim development method would likely result in an overstated 
estimate of unpaid claims. When selecting claim development factors, we rely on the latest three-
year volume-weighted average for ages 12-to-24, 24-to-36, and 36-to-48. We judgmentally select 
291

=== PDF PAGE 298 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
a factor of 1.000 for all remaining intervals to smooth out the variability seen in the average age-
to-age factors. In practice, actuarial judgment plays a vital role in the selection of claim 
development factors.  
 
In Exhibit III, Sheet 4, we begin the adjustment process for changes in claims settlement rates. 
We select disposal rates based on the last diagonal of closed claim counts divided by the 
projected ultimate reported claim counts. (We developed the projected ultimate reported claim 
counts in Chapter 11.) We follow the same approach that is described for Berq-Sher Auto BI 
Insurer. Exhibits III, Sheets 5 and 6, which provide for the derivation of adjusted paid claims, 
follow the same format as the previous example.  
 
We analyze the adjusted paid claim development triangle in Exhibit III, Sheet 7. We select claim 
development factors based on the five-year volume-weighted average and compare these selected 
factors to those selected in Chapter 7 based on the unadjusted paid claim triangle. For most 
maturity ages, the selected development factors based on the adjusted paid claims are less than 
those based on the unadjusted claims. This is consistent with our expectations since we believe 
that the rate of settlement has increased, and thus, an unadjusted paid claim development method 
would likely result in an overstated unpaid claim estimate. 
 
Our last projection for XYZ Insurer adjusts the data for changes in both case outstanding 
adequacy and the rate of claims settlement. Since we know that there have been changes in the 
rate of claims settlement for XYZ Insurer, we question the first projection, which is a case 
outstanding only adjustment. In our final projection, we use both an adjusted average paid claim 
triangle and the adjusted average case outstanding triangle. There is one new adjusted triangle we 
need to create for this projection: the adjusted number of open claims. We derive the adjusted 
open claim count triangle by subtracting the adjusted closed claim count triangle from reported 
claim counts. The adjusted reported claim triangle is then equal to: 
 
   {[(adjusted average case outstanding) x (adjusted open claim counts)] + (adjusted paid claims)} 
 
We analyze this adjusted reported claim triangle in Exhibit III, Sheet 9. We present the 
unadjusted selected claim development factors as well as the selected claim development factors 
from the case outstanding only adjustment. We note that the average age-to-age factors tend to be 
between these two sets of selected claim development factors. In Exhibit III, Sheet 9, we select 
claim development factors based on the three-year volume-weighted average through 72 months; 
to smooth the indications for the older maturities, we select a claim development factor of 1.00 
for all remaining age intervals. 
 
In Exhibit III, Sheets 10 and 11, we project ultimate claims and derive estimates of unpaid claims, 
respectively, based on the three Berquist-Sherman adjustments to reported and paid claims. We 
quickly see that all three projections are relatively close to one another for all accident years. In 
Exhibit III, Sheets 12 and 13, we compare the results of the Berquist-Sherman projections with all 
the other techniques presented for XYZ Insurer. In Exhibit III, Sheet 12, we compare projected 
ultimate claims and in Exhibit III, Sheet 13, we compare estimated IBNR. 
 
We observe significant differences when we compare the estimates of total unpaid claims based 
on the unadjusted development technique to the unpaid claim estimates based on the development 
technique applied to adjusted claims data. In the following table, we summarize these estimates of 
unpaid claims. 
292

=== PDF PAGE 299 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques 
 
 
 
 
($ Millions) 
Estimated 
IBNR 
Total Unpaid 
Claim Estimate 
Unadjusted Reported Claims  65 184 
Unadjusted Paid Claims 155 274 
   
Adjusted (Case Only) Reported Claims 27 146 
Adjusted (Case and Settlement) Reported Claims 40 159 
Adjusted Paid Claims 36 155 
 
In Chapter 15, we address the evaluation and selection of ultimate claims for many of our 
examples, including XYZ Insurer. 
 
The actuary may also want to consider whether or not the results of the Berquist-Sherman 
analyses should be reflected in a revised Bornhuetter-Ferguson projection for XYZ Insurer. 
Specifically, the adjusted reporting and payment patterns could be used in place of the unadjusted 
reporting and payment patterns, and any changes in the expected claim ratios due to Berquist-
Sherman indications could also be considered in the initial expected claims.  
293

=== PDF PAGE 300 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 1
Unadjusted Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Unadjusted Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
1969 2,897,000     5,160,000     10,714,000  15,228,000   16,611,000   20,899,000   22,892,000   23,506,000  
1970 4,828,000     10,707,000  16,907,000   22,840,000   26,211,000   31,970,000   32,216,000  
1971 5,455,000     11,941,000  20,733,000   30,928,000   42,395,000   48,377,000  
1972 8,732,000     18,633,000  32,143,000   57,196,000   61,163,000  
1973 11,228,000  19,967,000   50,143,000   73,733,000  
1974 8,706,000     33,459,000  63,477,000  
1975 12,928,000  48,904,000  
1976 15,791,000  
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 1.781 2.076 1.421 1.091 1.258 1.095 1.027
1970 2.218 1.579 1.351 1.148 1.220 1.008
1971 2.189 1.736 1.492 1.371 1.141
1972 2.134 1.725 1.779 1.069
1973 1.778 2.511 1.470
1974 3.843 1.897
1975 3.783
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
All Years 2.532 1.921 1.503 1.170 1.206 1.052 1.027
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108
Selected 2.532 1.921 1.503 1.170 1.206 1.052 1.027 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 11.145 4.402 2.291 1.524 1.303 1.080 1.027 1.000
Percent Reported 9.0% 22.7% 43.6% 65.6% 76.7% 92.6% 97.4% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_1 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
294

=== PDF PAGE 301 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 2
Unadjusted Paid Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Unadjusted Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
1969 125,000        406,000        1,443,000     2,986,000     4,467,000     8,179,000     12,638,000  15,815,000  
1970 43,000          529,000        2,016,000     3,641,000     7,523,000     14,295,000  18,983,000  
1971 295,000        1,147,000     2,479,000     5,071,000     11,399,000  17,707,000  
1972 50,000          786,000        3,810,000     9,771,000     18,518,000  
1973 213,000        833,000        3,599,000     11,292,000  
1974 172,000        1,587,000     6,267,000     
1975 210,000        1,565,000     
1976 209,000        
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 3.248 3.554 2.069 1.496 1.831 1.545 1.251
1970 12.302 3.811 1.806 2.066 1.900 1.328
1971 3.888 2.161 2.046 2.248 1.553
1972 15.720 4.847 2.565 1.895
1973 3.911 4.321 3.138
1974 9.227 3.949
1975 7.452
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Volume-weighted Average
All Years 6.185 3.709 2.455 1.952 1.718 1.407 1.251
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108
Selected 6.185 3.709 2.455 1.952 1.718 1.407 1.251 1.486
CDF to Ultimate 494.097 79.886 21.538 8.773 4.495 2.616 1.859 1.486
Percent Paid 0.2% 1.3% 4.6% 11.4% 22.2% 38.2% 53.8% 67.3%
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_2 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
295

=== PDF PAGE 302 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Development Technique and Unadjusted Data
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/76 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/76 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1969 96  23,506,000  15,815,000 1.000 1.486  23,506,000  23,501,090
1970 84  32,216,000  18,983,000 1.027 1.859  33,085,832  35,289,397
1971 72  48,377,000  17,707,000 1.080 2.616  52,247,160  46,321,512
1972 60  61,163,000  18,518,000 1.303 4.495  79,695,389  83,238,410
1973 48  73,733,000  11,292,000 1.524 8.773  112,369,092  99,064,716
1974 36  63,477,000  6,267,000 2.291 21.538  145,425,807  134,978,646
1975 24  48,904,000  1,565,000 4.402 79.886  215,275,408  125,021,590
1976 12  15,791,000  209,000 11.145 494.097  175,990,695  103,266,273
Total  367,167,000  90,356,000  837,595,383  650,681,634
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 1976.
(3) and (4) Based on data from Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_3 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
296

=== PDF PAGE 303 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 4
Development Triangles - Unadjusted Data
Accident Unadjusted Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
1969 2,772,000     4,754,000     9,271,000     12,242,000  12,144,000   12,720,000   10,254,000  7,691,000    
1970 4,785,000     10,178,000  14,891,000   19,199,000   18,688,000   17,675,000   13,233,000  
1971 5,160,000     10,794,000  18,254,000   25,857,000   30,996,000   30,670,000  
1972 8,682,000     17,847,000  28,333,000   47,425,000   42,645,000  
1973 11,015,000  19,134,000   46,544,000   62,441,000  
1974 8,534,000     31,872,000  57,210,000  
1975 12,718,000  47,339,000  
1976 15,582,000  
Accident Open Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 749                840                1,001             1,206             1,034             765                533                359                
1970 660                957                1,149             1,350             1,095             755                539                
1971 878                1,329             1,720             1,799             1,428             1,056             
1972 1,043             1,561             1,828             1,894             1,522             
1973 1,088             1,388             1,540             1,877             
1974 1,033             1,418             1,663             
1975 1,138             1,472             
1976 1,196             
Accident Unadjusted Average Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 3,701             5,660             9,262             10,151          11,745          16,627          19,238          21,423          
1970 7,250             10,635          12,960          14,221          17,067          23,411          24,551          
1971 5,877             8,122             10,613          14,373          21,706          29,044          
1972 8,324             11,433          15,499          25,040          28,019          
1973 10,124          13,785          30,223          33,266          
1974 8,261             22,477          34,402          
1975 11,176          32,160          
1976 13,028          
Annual Change based on Exponential Regression Analysis of Severities and Accident Year
15.6% 29.5% 31.1% 34.2% 33.0% 32.2% 27.6%
Goodness of Fit Test of Exponential Regression Analysis (R-Squared)
80.0% 89.5% 85.8% 94.1% 98.9% 98.3% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_4 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
297

=== PDF PAGE 304 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 5
Development Triangles - Unadjusted Data
Accident Unadjusted Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
1969 125,000        406,000        1,443,000     2,986,000     4,467,000     8,179,000     12,638,000  15,815,000  
1970 43,000          529,000        2,016,000     3,641,000     7,523,000     14,295,000  18,983,000  
1971 295,000        1,147,000     2,479,000     5,071,000     11,399,000  17,707,000  
1972 50,000          786,000        3,810,000     9,771,000     18,518,000  
1973 213,000        833,000        3,599,000     11,292,000  
1974 172,000        1,587,000     6,267,000     
1975 210,000        1,565,000     
1976 209,000        
Accident Ratio of Unadjusted Paid Claims to Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 0.043             0.079             0.135             0.196             0.269             0.391             0.552             0.673             
1970 0.009             0.049             0.119             0.159             0.287             0.447             0.589             
1971 0.054             0.096             0.120             0.164             0.269             0.366             
1972 0.006             0.042             0.119             0.171             0.303             
1973 0.019             0.042             0.072             0.153             
1974 0.020             0.047             0.099             
1975 0.016             0.032             
1976 0.013             
Accident Unadjusted Average Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 402                539                2,971             8,620             9,199             12,669          17,084          16,634          
1970 110                919                5,487             9,129             12,403          18,452          19,533          
1971 706                1,115             5,644             4,928             12,994          14,948          
1972 161                862                5,782             9,477             14,085          
1973 724                541                4,003             11,709          
1974 518                1,394             7,635             
1975 517                1,494             
1976 525                
Annual Change based on Exponential Regression Analysis of Severities and Accident Year
12.9% 12.0% 11.5% 6.7% 14.2% 8.6% 14.3%
Goodness of Fit Test of Exponential Regression Analysis (R-Squared)
18.3% 35.3% 37.9% 10.1% 84.6% 19.3% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_5 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
298

=== PDF PAGE 305 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 6
Derivation of Adjusted Reported Claim Development Triangle
Accident Adjusted Average Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 4,898            13,904          17,104          19,020          18,423          21,961          21,349          21,423          
1970 5,633            15,989          19,669          21,873          21,186          25,255          24,551          
1971 6,477            18,387          22,620          25,154          24,364          29,044          
1972 7,449            21,145          26,013          28,927          28,019          
1973 8,566            24,317          29,915          33,266          
1974 9,851            27,965          34,402          
1975 11,329          32,160          
1976 13,028          
Selected Annual Severity Trend Rate 15%
Accident Adjusted Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
1969 3,793,504     12,084,942   18,563,821   25,924,316   23,516,364   24,979,245   24,016,864   23,506,000   
1970 3,760,482     15,830,500   24,615,996   33,169,802   30,722,141   33,362,729   32,216,000   
1971 5,982,185     25,583,831   41,384,825   50,323,342   46,191,356   48,377,000   
1972 7,819,355     33,794,110   51,361,061   64,559,286   61,163,000   
1973 9,533,246     34,585,431   49,667,342   73,733,000   
1974 10,348,458   41,241,243   63,477,000   
1975 13,102,479   48,904,000   
1976 15,791,000   
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_6 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
299

=== PDF PAGE 306 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 7
Adjusted Reported Claims
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Adjusted Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96
1969 3,793,504     12,084,942  18,563,821   25,924,316   23,516,364   24,979,245   24,016,864   23,506,000  
1970 3,760,482     15,830,500  24,615,996   33,169,802   30,722,141   33,362,729   32,216,000  
1971 5,982,185     25,583,831  41,384,825   50,323,342   46,191,356   48,377,000  
1972 7,819,355     33,794,110  51,361,061   64,559,286   61,163,000  
1973 9,533,246     34,585,431  49,667,342   73,733,000  
1974 10,348,458  41,241,243   63,477,000  
1975 13,102,479  48,904,000  
1976 15,791,000  
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 3.186            1.536            1.396            0.907            1.062            0.961            0.979            
1970 4.210            1.555            1.347            0.926            1.086            0.966            
1971 4.277            1.618            1.216            0.918            1.047            
1972 4.322            1.520            1.257            0.947            
1973 3.628            1.436            1.485            
1974 3.985            1.539            
1975 3.732            
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
All Years 3.906            1.534            1.340            0.925            1.065           0.964            0.979            
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36
36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108
Unadj Selected 2.532            1.921            1.503            1.170            1.206            1.052            1.027            1.000            
Adj Selected 3.906            1.534            1.340            0.925            1.065            0.964            0.979            1.000            
CDF to Ultimate 7.465            1.911            1.246            0.930            1.005            0.944            0.979            1.000            
Percent Reported 13.4% 52.3% 80.3% 107.5% 99.5% 105.9% 102.1% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_7 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
300

=== PDF PAGE 307 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 8
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Development Technique and Adjusted Data
Projected Ultimate Claims
Age of Claims at 12/31/76 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Accident Accident Year Adjusted Adjusted Adjusted
Year at 12/31/76 Reported Paid Reported Reported Paid Reported Reported Paid Reported
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1969 96  23,506,000  15,815,000  23,506,000 1.000 1.486 1.000  23,506,000  23,501,090  23,506,000
1970 84  32,216,000  18,983,000  32,216,000 1.027 1.859 0.979  33,085,832  35,289,397  31,539,464
1971 72  48,377,000  17,707,000  48,377,000 1.080 2.616 0.944  52,247,160  46,321,512  45,667,888
1972 60  61,163,000  18,518,000  61,163,000 1.303 4.495 1.005  79,695,389  83,238,410  61,468,815
1973 48  73,733,000  11,292,000  73,733,000 1.524 8.773 0.930  112,369,092  99,064,716  68,571,690
1974 36  63,477,000  6,267,000  63,477,000 2.291 21.538 1.246  145,425,807  134,978,646  79,092,342
1975 24  48,904,000  1,565,000  48,904,000 4.402 79.886 1.911  215,275,408  125,021,590  93,455,544
1976 12  15,791,000  209,000  15,791,000 11.145 494.097 7.465  175,990,695  103,266,273  117,879,815
Total  367,167,000  90,356,000  367,167,000  837,595,383  650,681,634  521,181,558
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 1976.
(3) and (4) Based on data from Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer.
(5) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 6.
(6) and (7) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(8) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheet 7.
(9) = [(3) x (6)].
(10) = [(4) x (7)].
(11) = [(5) x (8)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_8 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
301

=== PDF PAGE 308 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 9
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate
Projected Ultimate Claims Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/76
Using Dev. Method with Case IBNR - Based on Dev. Method with  Total - Based on Dev. Method with
Accident Claims at 12/31/76 Adjusted Outstanding Adjusted Adjusted
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported at 12/31/76 Reported Paid Reported Reported Paid Reported
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13)
1969  23,506,000  15,815,000  23,506,000  23,501,090  23,506,000  7,691,000 0 - 4,910 0  7,691,000  7,686,090  7,691,000
1970  32,216,000  18,983,000  33,085,832  35,289,397  31,539,464  13,233,000  869,832  3,073,397 - 676,536  14,102,832  16,306,397  12,556,464
1971  48,377,000  17,707,000  52,247,160  46,321,512  45,667,888  30,670,000  3,870,160 - 2,055,488 - 2,709,112  34,540,160  28,614,512  27,960,888
1972  61,163,000  18,518,000  79,695,389  83,238,410  61,468,815  42,645,000  18,532,389  22,075,410  305,815  61,177,389  64,720,410  42,950,815
1973  73,733,000  11,292,000  112,369,092  99,064,716  68,571,690  62,441,000  38,636,092  25,331,716 - 5,161,310  101,077,092  87,772,716  57,279,690
1974  63,477,000  6,267,000  145,425,807  134,978,646  79,092,342  57,210,000  81,948,807  71,501,646  15,615,342  139,158,807  128,711,646  72,825,342
1975  48,904,000  1,565,000  215,275,408  125,021,590  93,455,544  47,339,000  166,371,408  76,117,590  44,551,544  213,710,408  123,456,590  91,890,544
1976  15,791,000  209,000  175,990,695  103,266,273  117,879,815  15,582,000  160,199,695  87,475,273  102,088,815  175,781,695  103,057,273  117,670,815
Total  367,167,000  90,356,000  837,595,383  650,681,634  521,181,558  276,811,000  470,428,383  283,514,634  154,014,558  747,239,383  560,325,634  430,825,558
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer.
(4) through (6) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 8.
(7) = [(2) - (3)].
(8) = [(4) - (2)].
(9) = [(5) - (2)].
(10) = [(6) - (2)].
(11) = [(7) + (8)].
(12) = [(7) + (9)].
(13) = [(7) + (10)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_9 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
302

=== PDF PAGE 309 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit I
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer Sheet 10
Sensitivity of Unpaid Claim Estimate to Assumed Annual Severity Trend
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35%
Annual Severity Trend
Unpaid Claim Estimate ($ Millions)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
Percent of Unadjusted Unpaid Claim Estimate
Before Adjustment After Adjustment
bs exhibits.xls 13_1_10 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
303

=== PDF PAGE 310 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 1
Unadjusted Paid Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 1,904          5,398          7,496          8,882          9,712          10,071        10,199        10,256        
1970 2,235          6,261          8,691          10,443        11,346        11,754        12,031        
1971 2,441          7,348          10,662        12,655        13,748        14,235        
1972 2,503          8,173          11,810        14,176        15,383        
1973 2,838          8,712          12,728        15,278        
1974 2,405          7,858          11,771        
1975 2,759          9,182          
1976 2,801          
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 2.835 1.389 1.185 1.093 1.037 1.013 1.006
1970 2.801 1.388 1.202 1.086 1.036 1.024
1971 3.010 1.451 1.187 1.086 1.035
1972 3.265 1.445 1.200 1.085
1973 3.070 1.461 1.200
1974 3.267 1.498
1975 3.328
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
All Years 3.082 1.439 1.195 1.088 1.036 1.018 1.006
Latest 4 3.233 1.464 1.197 1.088 1.036 1.018 1.006
Volume-weighted Average
All Years 3.098 1.444 1.196 1.087 1.036 1.019 1.006
Latest 4 3.229 1.464 1.197 1.087 1.036 1.019 1.006
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108
Selected 3.098 1.444 1.196 1.087 1.036 1.019 1.006 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 6.170 1.991 1.379 1.154 1.061 1.024 1.006 1.000
Percent Reported 16.2% 50.2% 72.5% 86.7% 94.3% 97.7% 99.4% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_1 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
304

=== PDF PAGE 311 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 2
Development Triangles - Unadjusted Data
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 4,079          6,616          7,192          7,494          7,670          7,749          7,792          7,806          
1970 4,429          7,230          7,899          8,291          8,494          8,606          8,647          
1971 4,914          8,174          9,068          9,518          9,761          9,855          
1972 4,497          7,842          8,747          9,254          9,469          
1973 4,419          7,665          8,659          9,093          
1974 3,486          6,214          6,916          
1975 3,516          6,226          
1976 3,230          
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 6,553          7,696          7,770          7,799          7,814          7,819          7,820          7,821          
1970 7,277          8,537          8,615          8,661          8,675          8,679          8,682          
1971 8,259          9,765          9,884          9,926          9,940          9,945          
1972 7,858          9,474          9,615          9,664          9,680          
1973 7,808          9,376          9,513          9,562          
1974 6,278          7,614          7,741          
1975 6,446          7,884          
1976 6,115          
Accident Ratio of Closed to Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 0.622          0.860          0.926          0.961          0.982          0.991          0.996          0.998          
1970 0.609          0.847          0.917          0.957          0.979          0.992          0.996          
1971 0.595          0.837          0.917          0.959          0.982          0.991          
1972 0.572          0.828          0.910          0.958          0.978          
1973 0.566          0.818          0.910          0.951          
1974 0.555          0.816          0.893          
1975 0.545          0.790          
1976 0.528          
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_2 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
305

=== PDF PAGE 312 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 3
Reported Claim Counts
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 6,553          7,696          7,770          7,799          7,814          7,819          7,820          7,821          
1970 7,277          8,537          8,615          8,661          8,675          8,679          8,682          
1971 8,259          9,765          9,884          9,926          9,940          9,945          
1972 7,858          9,474          9,615          9,664          9,680          
1973 7,808          9,376          9,513          9,562          
1974 6,278          7,614          7,741          
1975 6,446          7,884          
1976 6,115          
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 1.174 1.010 1.004 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000
1970 1.173 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000
1971 1.182 1.012 1.004 1.001 1.001
1972 1.206 1.015 1.005 1.002
1973 1.201 1.015 1.005
1974 1.213 1.017
1975 1.223
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
All Years 1.196 1.013 1.005 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108
Selected 1.196 1.013 1.005 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.221 1.021 1.008 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 81.9% 97.9% 99.2% 99.7% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_3 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
306

=== PDF PAGE 313 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 4
Projection of Ultimate Claim Counts
Age of Reported Projected
Accident Accident Year Claim Counts CDF Ultimate
Year at 12/31/76 at 12/31/76 to Ultimate Claim Counts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1969 96  7,821 1.000  7,821
1970 84  8,682 1.000  8,682
1971 72  9,945 1.000  9,945
1972 60  9,680 1.001  9,690
1973 48  9,562 1.003  9,591
1974 36  7,741 1.008  7,803
1975 24  7,884 1.021  8,050
1976 12  6,115 1.221  7,466
Total  67,430  69,047
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 1976.
(3) Based on data from Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer.
(4) Based on CDF from Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_4 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
307

=== PDF PAGE 314 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 5
Disposal Rate and Development of Adjusted Closed Claim Counts
Projected
Accident Disposal Rate as of (months) Ultimate
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   Claim Counts
1969 0.522          0.846          0.920          0.958          0.981          0.991          0.996          0.998          7,821            
1970 0.510          0.833          0.910          0.955          0.978          0.991          0.996          8,682            
1971 0.494          0.822          0.912          0.957          0.981          0.991          9,945            
1972 0.464          0.809          0.903          0.955          0.977          9,690            
1973 0.461          0.799          0.903          0.948          9,591            
1974 0.447          0.796          0.886          7,803            
1975 0.437          0.773          8,050            
1976 0.433          7,466            
Selected Disposal Rate by Maturity Age
0.433          0.773          0.886          0.948          0.977          0.991          0.996          0.998          
Accident Adjusted Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 3,383          6,049          6,932          7,415          7,643          7,750          7,789          7,806          
1970 3,756          6,715          7,695          8,231          8,484          8,603          8,647          
1971 4,302          7,692          8,815          9,429          9,719          9,855          
1972 4,192          7,495          8,588          9,187          9,469          
1973 4,149          7,418          8,501          9,093          
1974 3,376          6,035          6,916          
1975 3,482          6,226          
1976 3,230          
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_5 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
308

=== PDF PAGE 315 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 6
Summary of Regression Analyses
Accident Year 1969 Accident Year 1970 Accident Year 1971
Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative
Closed Paid Predicted Closed Paid Predicted Closed Paid Predicted
Months of Claim Counts Claims Y Value Claim Counts Claims Y Value Claim Counts Claims Y Value
Development X Y Y=ae^(bX) X Y Y=ae^(bX) X Y Y=ae^(bX)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (5) (6) (7)
12 4,079           1,904          1,850          4,429           2,235          2,184          4,914           2,441          2,404          
24 6,616           5,398          5,885          7,230           6,261          6,715          8,174           7,348          7,722          
36 7,192           7,496          7,653          7,899           8,691          8,781          9,068           10,662        10,634        
48 7,494           8,882          8,783          8,291           10,443        10,275        9,518           12,655        12,493        
60 7,670           9,712          9,518          8,494           11,346        11,147        9,761           13,748        13,628        
72 7,749           10,071        9,867          8,606           11,754        11,659        9,855           14,235        14,095        
84 7,792           10,199        10,062        8,647           12,031        11,852        
96 7,806           10,256        10,127        
R Squared 0.99573      0.99709      0.99866      
  a 287.742      369.685      413.901      
  b 0.000456    0.000401    0.000358    
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_6 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
309

=== PDF PAGE 316 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 7
Derivation of Adjusted Paid Claims
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months) Accident Parameter a for Two-Point Exponential Fit
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 4,079       6,616       7,192       7,494       7,670       7,749       7,792       7,806       1969 356          124          132          198          286          1,034       459          
1970 4,429       7,230       7,899       8,291       8,494       8,606       8,647       1970 438          181          215          353          778          88            
1971 4,914       8,174       9,068       9,518       9,761       9,855       1971 464          244          337          493          370          
1972 4,497       7,842       8,747       9,254       9,469       1972 510          337          506          421          
1973 4,419       7,665       8,659       9,093       1973 616          468          333          
1974 3,486       6,214       6,916       1974 530          220          
1975 3,516       6,226       1975 580          
1976 3,230       1976
Accident Paid Claims ($000) as of (months) Accident Parameter b for Two-Point Exponential Fit
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 1,904       5,398       7,496       8,882       9,712       10,071     10,199     10,256     1969 0.000411 0.000570 0.000562 0.000508 0.000459 0.000294 0.000398
1970 2,235       6,261       8,691       10,443     11,346     11,754     12,031     1970 0.000368 0.000490 0.000468 0.000409 0.000315 0.000568
1971 2,441       7,348       10,662     12,655     13,748     14,235     1971 0.000338 0.000416 0.000381 0.000341 0.000370
1972 2,503       8,173       11,810     14,176     15,383     1972 0.000354 0.000407 0.000360 0.000380
1973 2,838       8,712       12,728     15,278     1973 0.000346 0.000381 0.000421
1974 2,405       7,858       11,771     1974 0.000434 0.000576
1975 2,759       9,182       1975 0.000444
1976 2,801       1976
Accident Adjusted Closed Claim Counts as of (months) Accident Adjusted Paid Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 3,383       6,049       6,932       7,415       7,643       7,750       7,789       7,806       1969 1,431       4,277       6,463       8,497       9,579       10,075     10,191     10,256     
1970 3,756       6,715       7,695       8,231       8,484       8,603       8,647       1970 1,745       5,181       7,865       10,156     11,301     11,744     12,031     
1971 4,302       7,692       8,815       9,429       9,719       9,855       1971 1,985       6,243       9,594       12,233     13,550     14,235     
1972 4,192       7,495       8,588       9,187       9,469       1972 2,247       7,228       11,072     13,837     15,383     
1973 4,149       7,418       8,501       9,093       1973 2,585       7,999       11,982     15,278     
1974 3,376       6,035       6,916       1974 2,292       7,271       11,771     
1975 3,482       6,226       1975 2,718       9,182       
1976 3,230       1976 2,801       
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_7 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
310

=== PDF PAGE 317 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 8
Adjusted Paid Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Adjusted Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   
1969 1,431          4,277          6,463          8,497          9,579          10,075        10,191        10,256        
1970 1,745          5,181          7,865          10,156        11,301        11,744        12,031        
1971 1,985          6,243          9,594          12,233        13,550        14,235        
1972 2,247          7,228          11,072        13,837        15,383        
1973 2,585          7,999          11,982        15,278        
1974 2,292          7,271          11,771        
1975 2,718          9,182          
1976 2,801          
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 2.989          1.511          1.315          1.127          1.052          1.012          1.006          
1970 2.969          1.518          1.291          1.113          1.039          1.024          
1971 3.145          1.537          1.275          1.108          1.051          
1972 3.217          1.532          1.250          1.112          
1973 3.094          1.498          1.275          
1974 3.172          1.619          
1975 3.378          
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
Simple Average
All Years 3.138 1.536 1.281 1.115 1.047 1.018 1.006
Latest 4 3.215 1.546 1.273 1.115 1.047 1.018 1.006
Volume-weighted Average
All Years 3.158 1.538 1.277 1.114 1.047 1.018 1.006
Latest 4 3.219 1.545 1.271 1.114 1.047 1.018 1.006
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108
Unadj Selected 3.098 1.444 1.196 1.087 1.036 1.019 1.006 1.000
Adj Selected 3.158 1.538 1.277 1.114 1.047 1.018 1.006 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 7.416 2.348 1.527 1.195 1.073 1.025 1.006 1.000
Percent Reported 13.5% 42.6% 65.5% 83.7% 93.2% 97.6% 99.4% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_8 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
311

=== PDF PAGE 318 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 9
Linear Regression of Development Factors Using Adjusted Paid Claims
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 2.989             1.511             1.315             1.127             1.052             1.012             1.006             
1970 2.969             1.518             1.291             1.113             1.039             1.024             
1971 3.145             1.537             1.275             1.108             1.051             
1972 3.217             1.532             1.250             1.112             
1973 3.094             1.498             1.275             
1974 3.172             1.619             
1975 3.378             
Estimated Intercept from Linear Regression Analysis of Age-to-Age Factors and Accident Year
-104.01           -25.08             25.05             11.36             2.21               
Estimated Slope from Linear Regression Analysis of Age-to-Age Factors and Accident Year
0.0543           0.0135           -0.0121           -0.0052           -0.0006           
Goodness of Fit Test of Linear Regression Analysis (R-Squared)
70.3% 34.4% 63.7% 61.0% 0.7%
Accident Age-to-Age Factors CDF
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult to Ultimate
1969 2.989             1.511             1.315             1.127             1.052             1.012             1.006             1.000 1.000            
1970 2.969             1.518             1.291             1.113             1.039             1.024             1.006             1.000 1.006            
1971 3.145             1.537             1.275             1.108             1.051             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.024            
1972 3.217             1.532             1.250             1.112             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.073            
1973 3.094             1.498             1.275             1.102             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.182            
1974 3.172             1.619             1.245             1.097             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.465            
1975 3.378             1.583             1.233             1.091             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 2.285            
1976 3.355             1.596             1.221             1.086             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 7.621            
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_9 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
312

=== PDF PAGE 319 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 10
Exponential Regression of Development Factors Using Adjusted Paid Claims
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult
1969 2.989             1.511             1.315             1.127             1.052             1.012             1.006             
1970 2.969             1.518             1.291             1.113             1.039             1.024             
1971 3.145             1.537             1.275             1.108             1.051             
1972 3.217             1.532             1.250             1.112             
1973 3.094             1.498             1.275             
1974 3.172             1.619             
1975 3.378             
Estimated Constant from Exponential Regression Analysis of Age-to-Age Factors and Accident Year
0                    0                    135,483,653  10,606           3                    
Estimated Growth from Exponential Regression Analysis of Age-to-Age Factors and Accident Year
1.0174           1.0086           0.9907           0.9954           0.9994           
Goodness of Fit Test of Exponential Regression Analysis (R-Squared)
70.6% 34.0% 63.3% 61.0% 0.7%
Accident Age-to-Age Factors CDF
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 To Ult to Ultimate
1969 2.989             1.511             1.315             1.127             1.052             1.012             1.006             1.000 1.000            
1970 2.969             1.518             1.291             1.113             1.039             1.024             1.006             1.000 1.006            
1971 3.145             1.537             1.275             1.108             1.051             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.024            
1972 3.217             1.532             1.250             1.112             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.073            
1973 3.094             1.498             1.275             1.102             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.182            
1974 3.172             1.619             1.245             1.097             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 1.466            
1975 3.378             1.582             1.234             1.092             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 2.286            
1976 3.359             1.596             1.222             1.087             1.047             1.018             1.006             1.000 7.638            
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_10 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
313

=== PDF PAGE 320 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 11
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Development Technique and Adjusted Data ($000)
CDF to Ultimate Projected Ultimate Claims Using Dev Method with
Age of Adjusted Paid Adjusted Paid
Accident Accident Year Paid Claims Unadjusted Volume Regression Unadjusted Volume Regression
Year at 12/31/76 at 12/31/76 Paid Weighted Linear Exponential Paid Weighted Linear Exponential
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1969 96  10,256 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000  10,256  10,256  10,256  10,256
1970 84  12,031 1.006 1.006 1.006 1.006  12,103  12,103  12,107  12,107
1971 72  14,235 1.024 1.025 1.024 1.024  14,577  14,591  14,583  14,583
1972 60  15,383 1.061 1.073 1.073 1.073  16,321  16,506  16,502  16,502
1973 48  15,278 1.154 1.195 1.182 1.182  17,631  18,257  18,059  18,061
1974 36  11,771 1.379 1.527 1.465 1.466  16,232  17,974  17,241  17,251
1975 24  9,182 1.991 2.348 2.285 2.286  18,281  21,559  20,984  20,993
1976 12  2,801 6.170 7.416 7.621 7.638  17,282  20,772  21,346  21,394
Total  90,937  122,684  132,019  131,079  131,147
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 1976.
(3) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 7.
(4) Based on CDF from Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(5) through (7) Based on CDF from Exhibit II, Sheets 8 through 10, respectively.
(8) = [(3) x (4)].
(9) = [(3) x (5)].
(10) = [(3) x (6)].
(11) = [(3) x (7)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_11 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
314

=== PDF PAGE 321 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer Sheet 12
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims Using Dev Method with Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/76
Adjusted Paid Adjusted Paid
Accident Paid Claims Unadjusted Volume Regression Unadjusted Volume Regression
Year at 12/31/76 Paid Weighted Linear Exponential Paid Weighted Linear Exponential
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1969  10,256  10,256  10,256  10,256  10,256 0000
1970  12,031  12,103  12,103  12,107  12,107  72  72  76  76
1971  14,235  14,577  14,591  14,583  14,583  342  356  348  348
1972  15,383  16,321  16,506  16,502  16,502  938  1,123  1,119  1,119
1973  15,278  17,631  18,257  18,059  18,061  2,353  2,979  2,781  2,783
1974  11,771  16,232  17,974  17,241  17,251  4,461  6,203  5,470  5,480
1975  9,182  18,281  21,559  20,984  20,993  9,099  12,377  11,802  11,811
1976  2,801  17,282  20,772  21,346  21,394  14,481  17,971  18,545  18,593
Total  90,937  122,684  132,019  131,079  131,147  31,747  41,082  40,142  40,210
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer.
(3) through (6) Developed in Exhibit II, Sheet 11.
(7) = [(3) - (2)].
(8) = [(4) - (2)].
(9) = [(5) - (2)].
(10) = [(6) - (2)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_2_12 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
315

=== PDF PAGE 322 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Average Paid Claims - Unadjusted Data
Accident Average Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 16,708        18,432        20,208        22,143        23,560        24,695        24,825        24,839        
1999 14,375        17,059        19,919        22,482        23,347        23,307        23,669        23,771        
2000 10,020        13,025        16,281        19,762        22,332        24,303        25,810        26,235        
2001 5,064          8,740          13,162        17,041        19,908        22,911        25,887        26,639        
2002 11,417        13,067        16,436        20,290        24,073        27,752        29,178        
2003 9,631          10,163        13,478        18,125        22,896        25,077        
2004 9,452          11,673        17,996        23,455        26,028        
2005 10,315        10,920        16,270        20,569        
2006 11,502        13,000        19,000        
2007 10,726        15,000        
2008 12,351        
Annual Change based on Exponential Regression Analysis of Severities and Accident Year
8.1% 5.4% 4.6% 4.3% 5.5% 5.1% 6.8% 4.8% 3.1% -4.2%
Goodness of Fit Test of Exponential Regression Analysis (R-Squared)
46.4% 54.1% 57.2% 64.2% 85.2% 72.3% 95.1% 83.9% 34.2% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_1 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
316

=== PDF PAGE 323 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Derivation of Case Adjusted Reported Claim Development Triangle
Accident Adjusted Average Case Outstanding as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 12,297        27,075        38,569        49,025        56,951        64,896        99,025        77,898        50,157        35,608        -              
1999 12,912        28,429        40,498        51,477        59,799        68,141        103,977      58,961        59,918        96,618        
2000 13,557        29,850        42,523        54,050        62,789        71,548        109,176      94,306        77,421        
2001 14,235        31,343        44,649        56,753        65,928        75,125        114,634      30,907        
2002 14,947        32,910        46,881        59,591        69,225        78,882        120,366      
2003 15,694        34,555        49,225        62,570        72,686        82,826        
2004 16,479        36,283        51,687        65,699        76,320        
2005 17,303        38,097        54,271        68,983        
2006 18,168        40,002        56,985        
2007 19,076        42,002        
2008 20,030        
Selected Annual Severity Trend Rate 5%
Accident Case Adjusted Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 14,600        15,094        15,513        17,104        16,366        16,163        15,835        15,822        
1999 23,630        25,296        26,319        26,802        28,294        24,795        25,071        25,107        
2000 27,527        31,913        34,908        36,211        37,153        37,698        37,505        37,246        
2001 15,789        29,146        35,224        39,380        39,748        38,452        39,706        38,798        
2002 19,342        37,781        46,968        49,984        47,313        47,570        48,169        
2003 20,451        40,865        46,599        45,605        43,373        44,373        
2004 30,186        57,792        66,886        69,522        70,288        
2005 33,704        56,945        65,226        70,655        
2006 24,715        41,339        48,804        
2007 19,992        31,732        
2008 18,632        
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_2 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
317

=== PDF PAGE 324 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Case Adjusted Reported Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Case Adjusted Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  14,600  15,094  15,513  17,104  16,366  16,163  15,835  15,822
1999  23,630  25,296  26,319  26,802  28,294  24,795  25,071  25,107
2000  27,527  31,913  34,908  36,211  37,153  37,698  37,505  37,246
2001  15,789  29,146  35,224  39,380  39,748  38,452  39,706  38,798
2002  19,342  37,781  46,968  49,984  47,313  47,570  48,169
2003  20,451  40,865  46,599  45,605  43,373  44,373
2004  30,186  57,792  66,886  69,522  70,288
2005  33,704  56,945  65,226  70,655
2006  24,715  41,339  48,804
2007  19,992  31,732
2008  18,632
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.034 1.028 1.103 0.957 0.988 0.980 0.999
1999 1.070 1.040 1.018 1.056 0.876 1.011 1.001
2000 1.159 1.094 1.037 1.026 1.015 0.995 0.993
2001 1.846 1.209 1.118 1.009 0.967 1.033 0.977
2002 1.953 1.243 1.064 0.947 1.005 1.013
2003 1.998 1.140 0.979 0.951 1.023
2004 1.915 1.157 1.039 1.011
2005 1.690 1.145 1.083
2006 1.673 1.181
2007 1.587
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.772 1.173 1.057 0.991 1.008 1.044 0.951 0.997 0.991 0.999
  Latest 3 1.650 1.161 1.034 0.970 0.999 1.020 0.949 0.997 0.991 0.999
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.759 1.161 1.062 0.990 1.016 1.034 0.967 0.993 0.991 0.999
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.772 1.169 1.055 0.990 1.007 1.033 0.957 0.998 0.993 0.999
  Latest 3 1.658 1.159 1.040 0.975 1.000 1.019 0.956 0.998 0.993 0.999
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Unadj Selected 1.687 1.265 1.102 1.020 1.050 1.010 1.011 1.000 0.993 0.999 1.000
Case Adj Selected 1.658 1.159 1.040 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.998 1.205 1.040 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 50.1% 83.0% 96.2% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_3 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
318

=== PDF PAGE 325 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Disposal Rate and Development of Adjusted Closed Claim Counts
Proj. Ultimate
Accident Disposal Rate as of (months) Reported
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   Claim Counts
1998 0.801          0.859          0.903          0.939          0.961          0.973          0.997          1.000          637               
1999 0.655          0.782          0.869          0.936          0.962          0.989          0.992          0.997          1,047            
2000 0.462          0.662          0.778          0.864          0.918          0.971          0.988          0.996          1,408            
2001 0.209          0.468          0.643          0.751          0.842          0.933          0.984          0.994          1,455            
2002 0.131          0.391          0.541          0.701          0.854          0.942          0.980          1,554            
2003 0.111          0.377          0.577          0.775          0.924          0.962          1,631            
2004 0.104          0.375          0.637          0.819          0.897          2,263            
2005 0.123          0.466          0.693          0.810          2,402            
2006 0.183          0.540          0.716          1,679            
2007 0.251          0.605          1,308            
2008 0.236          1,172            
Selected Disposal Rate by Maturity Age
0.236          0.605          0.716          0.810          0.897          0.962         0.980          0.994          0.996          0.997          1.000          
Accident Adjusted Closed Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 150             385             456             516             571             613             624             633             634             635             637             
1999 247             633             749             848             939             1,007          1,026          1,041          1,043          1,044          
2000 332             851             1,007          1,141          1,263          1,354          1,380          1,399          1,402          
2001 343             880             1,041          1,179          1,305          1,399          1,426          1,446          
2002 366             940             1,112          1,259          1,394          1,494          1,523          
2003 384             986             1,167          1,321          1,462          1,568          
2004 533             1,368          1,619          1,833          2,029          
2005 566             1,452          1,719          1,946          
2006 395             1,015          1,201          
2007 308             791             
2008 276             
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_4 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
319

=== PDF PAGE 326 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Summary of Regression Analyses
Accident Year 1998 Accident Year 1999 Accident Year 2000
Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative
Closed Paid Predicted Closed Paid Predicted Closed Paid Predicted
Months of Claim Counts Claims Y Value Claim Counts Claims Y Value Claim Counts Claims Y Value
Development X Y Y=ae^(bX) X Y Y=ae^(bX) X Y Y=ae^(bX)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (5) (6) (7)
12
24 650               6,513          6,437          
36 686               9,861          9,952          932               12,139        12,357        
48 510               8,521          8,458        819               13,971        14,066        1,095            17,828        18,013        
60 547               10,082        10,208      910               18,127        17,823        1,216            24,030        23,829        
72 575               11,620        11,770      980               22,032        21,383        1,292            28,853        28,407        
84 598               13,242        13,230      1,007            23,511        22,939        1,367            33,222        33,786        
96 612               14,419        14,206      1,036            24,146        24,737        1,391            35,902        35,714        
108 620               15,311        14,796      1,039            24,592        24,930        1,402            36,782        36,635        
120 635               15,764        15,968      1,044            24,817        25,257        
132 637               15,822        16,131      
R Squared 0.99373    0.99620      0.99954      
  a 632.591    1,670.748   1,432.021   
  b 0.005084 0.002601    0.002312    
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_5 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
320

=== PDF PAGE 327 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 6
Derivation of Adjusted Paid Claims
Accident Closed Claim Counts as of (months) Accident Parameter a for Two-Point Exponential Fit
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 510           547           575           598           612           620           635           637           1998 838           631           443           349           146           4,582        4,898        
1999 686           819           910           980           1,007        1,036        1,039        1,044        1999 1,635        1,341        1,434        2,086        9,315        43            3,708        
2000 650           932           1,095        1,216        1,292        1,367        1,391        1,402        2000 1,550        1,349        1,196        1,288        2,543        400           1,682        
2001 304           681           936           1,092        1,225        1,357        1,432        1,446        2001 517           853           1,037        2,021        2,561        1,289        733           
2002 203           607           841           1,089        1,327        1,464        1,523        2002 1,249        1,878        2,817        4,090        3,111        4,397        
2003 181           614           941           1,263        1,507        1,568        2003 1,023        1,647        2,258        2,737        1,368        
2004 235           848           1,442        1,852        2,029        2004 1,253        2,500        4,239        5,626        
2005 295           1,119
       1,664        1,946        2005 1,850        2,386        2,695        
2006 307           906           1,201        2006 1,904        1,545        
2007 329           791           2007 1,488        
2008 276           2008
Accident Paid Claims ($000) as of (months) Accident Parameter b for Two-Point Exponential Fit
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 6,309        8,521        10,082      11,620      13,242      14,419      15,311      15,764      15,822      1998 0.004548 0.005068 0.005682 0.006082 0.007504 0.001946 0.001841
1999 4,666        9,861        13,971      18,127      22,032      23,511      24,146      24,592      24,817      1999 0.002619 0.002861 0.002788 0.002405 0.000919 0.006102 0.001821
2000 1,302        6,513        12,139      17,828      24,030      28,853      33,222      35,902      36,782      2000 0.002208 0.002358 0.002467 0.002407 0.001880 0.003233 0.002200
2001 1,539        5,952        12,319      18,609      24,387      31,090      37,070      38,519      2001 0.003587 0.002853 0.002644 0.002033 0.001840 0.002346 0.002740
2002 2,318        7,932        13,822      22,095      31,945      40,629      44,437      2002 0.003045 0.002374 0.001891 0.001549 0.001755 0.001519
2003 1,743        6,240        12,683      22,892      34,505      39,320      2003 0.002945 0.002169 0.001834 0.001682 0.002142
2004 2,221        9,898        25,950      43,439      52,811      2004 0.002438 0.001623 0.001257 0.001104
2005 3,043        12,219      27,073      40,026      2005 0.001687 0.001460 0.001387
2006 3,531        11,778      22,819      2006 0.002011 0.002242
2007 3,529        11,865      2007 0.002625
2008 3,409        2008
Accident Adjusted Closed Claim Counts as of (months) Accident Adjusted Paid Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 150           385           456           516           571           613           624           633           634           635           637           1998 1,658        4,830        6,659        8,760        11,401      14,476      15,439      15,705      15,742      15,769      15,822      
1999 247           633           749           848           939           1,007        1,026        1,041        1,043        1,044        1999 3,120        8,584        11,634      15,191      19,649      23,499      23,928      24,660      24,751      24,817      
2000 332           851           1,007        1,141        1,263        1,354        1,380        1,399        1,402        2000 3,225        10,158      14,502      19,957      26,887      32,415      34,638      36,563      36,782      
2001 343           880           1,041        1,179        1,305        1,399        1,426        1,446        2001 1,769        10,493      16,264      22,201      28,245      34,318      36,550      38,519      
2002 366           940           1,112        1,259        1,394        1,494        1,523        2002 3,808        16,656      22,893      28,752      35,907      42,543      44,437      
2003 384           986           1,167        1,321        1,462        1,568        2003 3,171        13,772      19,187      25,242      32,008      39,320      
2004 533           1,368        1,619        1,833        2,029        2004 4,592        23,014      32,407      42,416      52,811      
2005 566           1,452        1,719        1,946        2005 4,805        19,876      29,202      40,026      
2006 395           1,015        1,201        2006 4,218        15,035      22,819      
2007 308           791           2007 3,341        11,865      
2008 276           2008 3,409        
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_6 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
321

=== PDF PAGE 328 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 7
Adjusted Paid Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Adjusted Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  1,658  4,830  6,659  8,760  11,401  14,476  15,439  15,705  15,742  15,769  15,822
1999  3,120  8,584  11,634  15,191  19,649  23,499  23,928  24,660  24,751  24,817
2000  3,225  10,158  14,502  19,957  26,887  32,415  34,638  36,563  36,782
2001  1,769  10,493  16,264  22,201  28,245  34,318  36,550  38,519
2002  3,808  16,656  22,893  28,752  35,907  42,543  44,437
2003  3,171  13,772  19,187  25,242  32,008  39,320
2004  4,592  23,014  32,407  42,416  52,811
2005  4,805  19,876  29,202  40,026
2006  4,218  15,035  22,819
2007  3,341  11,865
2008  3,409
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.316 1.302 1.270 1.066 1.017 1.002 1.002 1.003
1999 1.355 1.306 1.294 1.196 1.018 1.031 1.004 1.003
2000 3.150 1.428 1.376 1.347 1.206 1.069 1.056 1.006
2001 5.932 1.550 1.365 1.272 1.215 1.065 1.054
2002 4.374 1.374 1.256 1.249 1.185 1.045
2003 4.344 1.393 1.316 1.268 1.228
2004 5.012 1.408 1.309 1.245
2005 4.136 1.469 1.371
2006 3.565 1.518
2007 3.551
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 4.122 1.433 1.323 1.276 1.206 1.053 1.039 1.004 1.002 1.003
  Latest 3 3.751 1.465 1.332 1.254 1.209 1.059 1.047 1.004 1.002 1.003
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 4.015 1.424 1.330 1.263 1.206 1.059 1.042 1.004 1.002 1.003
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 4.152 1.432 1.322 1.269 1.206 1.053 1.044 1.005 1.002 1.003
  Latest 3 3.783 1.458 1.333 1.252 1.208 1.058 1.049 1.005 1.002 1.003
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Unadj Selected 3.349 2.079 1.574 1.316 1.203 1.136 1.059 1.022 1.017 1.004 1.010
Adj Selected 4.152 1.432 1.322 1.269 1.206 1.053 1.044 1.005 1.002 1.003 1.010
CDF to Ultimate 13.490 3.249 2.269 1.716 1.352 1.121 1.065 1.020 1.015 1.013 1.010
Percent Reported 7.4% 30.8% 44.1% 58.3% 74.0% 89.2% 93.9% 98.0% 98.5% 98.7% 99.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_7 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
322

=== PDF PAGE 329 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 8
Derivation of Both Adjusted Reported Claims
Accident Adjusted Open Claim Counts as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 118             64               22               13               4                 3                 2                 -              
1999 277             191             108             43               27               6                 4                 3                 
2000 503             390             270             147             54               28               9                 6                 
2001 962             541             408             279             153             56               29               9                 
2002 976             574             436             298             155             58               31               
2003 989             630             463             305             167             61               
2004 1,399          800             615             416             229             
2005 1,501          841             648             444             
2006 1,078          630             456             
2007 884             473             
2008 760             
Accident Both Adjusted Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 14,541        15,031        15,934        16,697        16,012        15,878        15,834        15,822        
1999 22,847        25,010        26,111        26,443        26,723        25,042        25,018        25,107        
2000 25,164        31,068        34,566        36,137        36,285        37,705        37,385        37,246        
2001 15,467        27,457        34,478        38,046        38,343        38,516        39,877        38,798        
2002 18,395        35,560        43,338        46,509        46,664        47,093        48,169        
2003 18,691        35,545        41,992        44,319        44,123        44,373        
2004 27,647        52,041        64,203        69,745        70,288        
2005 30,780        51,904        64,391        70,655        
2006 23,796        40,240        48,804        
2007 20,202        31,732        
2008 18,632        
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_8 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
323

=== PDF PAGE 330 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 9
Both Adjusted Reported Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Both Adjusted Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  14,541  15,031  15,934  16,697  16,012  15,878  15,834  15,822
1999  22,847  25,010  26,111  26,443  26,723  25,042  25,018  25,107
2000  25,164  31,068  34,566  36,137  36,285  37,705  37,385  37,246
2001  15,467  27,457  34,478  38,046  38,343  38,516  39,877  38,798
2002  18,395  35,560  43,338  46,509  46,664  47,093  48,169
2003  18,691  35,545  41,992  44,319  44,123  44,373
2004  27,647  52,041  64,203  69,745  70,288
2005  30,780  51,904  64,391  70,655
2006  23,796  40,240  48,804
2007  20,202  31,732
2008  18,632
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Yea
r 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.034 1.060 1.048 0.959 0.992 0.996 0.999
1999 1.095 1.044 1.013 1.011 0.937 0.999 1.004
2000 1.235 1.113 1.045 1.004 1.039 0.992 0.996
2001 1.775 1.256 1.103 1.008 1.005 1.035 0.973
2002 1.933 1.219 1.073 1.003 1.009 1.023
2003 1.902 1.181 1.055 0.996 1.006
2004 1.882 1.234 1.086 1.008
2005 1.686 1.241 1.097
2006 1.691 1.213
2007 1.571
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.746 1.217 1.083 1.012 1.007 1.031 0.965 0.996 1.000 0.999
  Latest 3 1.649 1.229 1.080 1.002 1.006 1.032 0.967 0.996 1.000 0.999
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.753 1.222 1.086 1.006 1.006 1.032 0.966 0.996 1.000 0.999
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.746 1.220 1.084 1.010 1.007 1.030 0.969 0.996 1.001 0.999
  Latest 3 1.657 1.230 1.083 1.003 1.007 1.032 0.970 0.996 1.001 0.999
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Unadj Selected 1.687 1.265 1.102 1.020 1.050 1.010 1.011 1.000 0.993 0.999 1.000
Case Adj Selected 1.658 1.159 1.040 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Both Adj Selected 1.657 1.230 1.083 1.003 1.007 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 2.229 1.345 1.094 1.010 1.007 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 44.9% 74.3% 91.4% 99.0% 99.3% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_9 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
324

=== PDF PAGE 331 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 10
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Development Technique and Adjusted Data ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Age of CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/08 Adjusted Reported Adjusted Adjusted Reported Adjusted
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Case Both Paid Case Both Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998 132  15,822  15,822 1.000 1.000 1.010  15,822  15,822  15,980
1999 120  25,107  24,817 1.000 1.000 1.013  25,107  25,107  25,140
2000 108  37,246  36,782 1.000 1.000 1.015  37,246  37,246  37,334
2001 96  38,798  38,519 1.000 1.000 1.020  38,798  38,798  39,290
2002 84  48,169  44,437 1.000 1.000 1.065  48,169  48,169  47,326
2003 72  44,373  39,320 1.000 1.000 1.121  44,373  44,373  44,078
2004 60  70,288  52,811 1.000 1.007 1.352  70,288  70,780  71,401
2005 48  70,655  40,026 1.000 1.010 1.716  70,655  71,362  68,685
2006 36  48,804  22,819 1.040 1.094 2.269  50,756  53,392  51,776
2007 24  31,732  11,865 1.205 1.345 3.249  38,237  42,680  38,549
2008 12  18,632  3,409 1.998 2.229 13.490  37,227  41,531  45,987
Total  449,626  330,629  476,678  489,258  485,546
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(5) through (7) Based on CDF from Exhibit III, Sheets 3, 9 and 7, respectively.
(8) = [(3) x (5)].
(9) = [(3) x (6)].
(10) = [(4) x (7)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_10 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
325

=== PDF PAGE 332 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 11
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims Unpaid Claim Estimate at 12/31/08
Using Dev. Method with Case IBNR - Based on Dev. Method with  Total - Based on Dev. Method with
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Adjusted Reported Adjusted Outstanding Adjusted Reported Adjusted Adjusted Reported Adjusted
Year Reported Paid Case Both Paid at 12/31/08 Case Both Paid Case Both Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980 0 0 0  158 0 0  158
1999  25,107  24,817  25,107  25,107  25,140  290 0 0  33  290  290  323
2000  37,246  36,782  37,246  37,246  37,334  465 0 0  87  465  465  552
2001  38,798  38,519  38,798  38,798  39,290  278 0 0  492  278  278  770
2002  48,169  44,437  48,169  48,169  47,326  3,731 0 0 - 843  3,731  3,731  2,888
2003  44,373  39,320  44,373  44,373  44,078  5,052 0 0 - 295  5,052  5,052  4,758
2004  70,288  52,811  70,288  70,780  71,401  17,477 0  492  1,112  17,477  17,969  18,589
2005  70,655  40,026  70,655  71,362  68,685  30,629 0  707 - 1,970  30,629  31,335  28,659
2006  48,804  22,819  50,756  53,392  51,776  25,985  1,952  4,588  2,972  27,937  30,573  28,957
2007  31,732  11,865  38,237  42,680  38,549  19,867  6,505  10,948  6,817  26,372  30,815  26,684
2008  18,632  3,409  37,227  41,531  45,987  15,223  18,595  22,899  27,355  33,818  38,122  42,578
Total  449,626  330,629  476,678  489,258  485,546  118,997  27,052  39,632  35,920  146,049  158,630  154,918
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) through (6) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 10.
(7) = [(2) - (3)].
(8) = [(4) - (2)].
(9) = [(5) - (2)].
(10) = [(6) - (2)].
(11) = [(7) + (8)].
(12) = [(7) + (9)].
(13) = [(7) + (10)].
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_11 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
326

=== PDF PAGE 333 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 12
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Projected Ultimate Claims
Accident Claims at 12/31/08 Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape Frequency-Severity Case O/S B-S Adjusted Reported B-S Adj
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Dev. Case Both Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,660  15,822  15,977  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980
1999  25,107  24,817  25,082  25,164  24,665  25,107  25,158  25,107  25,082  25,054  25,107  25,107  25,140
2000  37,246  36,782  36,948  37,922  35,235  37,246  37,841  37,246  37,083  36,912  37,246  37,246  37,334
2001  38,798  38,519  38,487  40,600  39,150  38,798  40,525  38,798  38,778  39,192  38,803  38,798  38,798  39,290
2002  48,169  44,437  48,313  49,592  47,906  48,312  49,417  48,313  48,655  46,869  48,796  48,169  48,169  47,326
2003  44,373  39,320  44,950  49,858  54,164  45,068  50,768  45,062  46,107  44,479  45,093  44,373  44,373  44,078
2004  70,288  52,811  74,787  80,537  86,509  75,492  82,593  74,754  76,620  71,906  74,873  70,288  70,780  71,401
2005  70,655  40,026  76,661  80,333  108,172  79,129  94,301  77,931  80,745  71,684  77,723  70,655  71,362  68,685
2006  48,804  22,819  58,370  72,108  70,786  60,404  71,205  58,759  64,505  49,913  58,665  50,756  53,392  51,776
2007  31,732  11,865  47,979  77,941  39,835  45,221  45,636  43,307  58,516  30,512  31,805  46,198  38,237  42,680  38,549
2008  18,632  3,409  47,530  74,995  39,433  42,607  41,049  39,201  59,242  30,140  29,828  46,005  37,227  41,531  45,987
Total  449,626  330,629  514,929  605,030  561,516  513,207  554,471  504,300  551,155  513,944  476,678  489,258  485,546
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(7) and (8) Developed in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(9) Developed in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(10) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit II, Sheet 6.
(11) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(12) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit VI, Sheet 7.
(13) Developed in Chapter 12, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(14)-(16) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 10.
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_12 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
327

=== PDF PAGE 334 ===
Chapter 13 - Berquist-Sherman Techniques Exhibit III
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 13
Summary of IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR
Accident Outstanding Development Method Expected B-F Method Cape Frequency-Severity Case O/S B-S Adjusted Reported B-S Adj
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Claims Reported Paid Cod Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Dev. Case Both Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15)
1998 0 0  158 - 162 0  155 0 0 0 0 0  158
1999  290 - 25  58 - 442 0  51 0 - 25 - 53 0 0  33
2000  465 - 298  676 - 2,011 0  595 0 - 163 - 334 0 0  87
2001  278 - 310  1,802  352 0  1,728 0 - 19  394  6 0 0  492
2002  3,731  145  1,423 - 262  143  1,248  144  486 - 1,300  627 0 0 - 843
2003  5,052  577  5,485  9,791  695  6,396  690  1,734  106  720 0 0 - 295
2004  17,477  4,498  10,249  16,221  5,204  12,305  4,466  6,331  1,618  4,585 0  492  1,112
2005  30,629  6,006  9,678  37,517  8,474  23,646  7,276  10,090  1,029  7,068 0  707 - 1,970
2006  25,985  9,566  23,304  21,982  11,600  22,401  9,955  15,701  1,109  9,861  1,952  4,588  2,972
2007  19,867  16,247  46,209  8,103  13,489  13,904  11,575  26,784 - 1,220  73  14,466  6,505  10,948  6,817
2008  15,223  28,898  56,363  20,801  23,975  22,417  20,569  40,610  11,508  11,196  27,373  18,595  22,899  27,355
Total  118,997  65,303  155,405  111,890  63,581  104,845  54,674  101,529  64,318  27,052  39,632  35,920
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) and (4) Estimated in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(5) Estimated in Chapter 8, Exhibit III, Sheet 3.
(6) and (7) Estimated in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(8) Estimated in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(9) Estimated in Chapter 11, Exhibit II, Sheet 7.
(10) Estimated in Chapter 11, Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(11) Estimated in Chapter 11, Exhibit VI, Sheet 8.
(12) Estimated in Chapter 12, Exhibit II, Sheet 5.
(13)-(15) Estimated in Exhibit III, Sheet 11.
bs exhibits.xls 13_3_13 22/07/2009 - 9:58 AM
328

=== PDF PAGE 335 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance 
 
 
CHAPTER 14 – RECOVERIES: SALVAGE AND SUBROGATION 
AND REINSURANCE 
 
 
Salvage and subrogation (S&S) are two of the most common types of recoveries for insurers. When 
an insurer pays an insured for a claim considered to be a total loss, the insurer acquires the rights to 
the damaged property. Salvage represents any amount that the insurer is able to collect from the 
sale of such damaged property. Subrogation refers to an insurer’s right to recover the amount of 
claim payment to a covered insured from a third-party responsible for the injury or damage.  
 
In Chapter 3 – Information Gathering, we discuss the importance of the actuary understanding the 
insurer’s practices with respect to S&S. The actuary needs to know whether paid claims are 
recorded net or gross of these recoveries. 
 
 
 
Salvage, Subrogation, and Collateral Sources 
 
Some insurers maintain detailed information regarding case outstanding estimates and payments 
for the different types of recoveries (e.g., salvage, subrogation, deductibles, and collateral 
sources). Other insurers may combine claims data for all types of recoveries; many insurers 
record only payments and do not estimate case outstanding for recoveries. Finally, some insurers 
treat recoveries as a negative claim payment and do not maintain separate data for recoveries. In 
order for the actuary to determine how to quantify the potential effect of S&S, he or she must 
understand how the insurer processes such recoveries and what data is available for analysis. 
 
When S&S data is available, actuaries frequently use the development technique to quantify the 
effect of S&S recoveries on estimates of total unpaid claims. The salvage portion of such 
recoveries is most commonly associated with property coverages and tends to be fast reporting 
and fast settling. Recoveries due to subrogation, typically associated with liability types of 
coverage, can take years to realize, well after the underlying claims are paid, resulting in age-to-
age factors less than one for older maturities for some lines of business. 
 
 
Estimating S&S Recoveries – Auto Physical Damage Insurer 
 
We use an example of an insurer writing automobile physical damage insurance (Auto Physical 
Damage Insurer) to demonstrate two methods commonly used to quantify S&S recoveries. This 
particular insurer maintains, separately, payment activity and case outstanding estimates for S&S. 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2, we use the development technique on reported and received S&S. 
(Some insurers use the term paid S&S instead of received S&S. It is important to recognize that 
paid S&S represents a payment made by a third-party to the insurer.) Since automobile physical 
damage is typically a quick reporting line of business, it is not surprising that the S&S associated 
with this coverage is also exhibiting a quick reporting pattern.  
 
The reported salvage and subrogation development factors in Exhibit I, Sheet 1, are very stable 
and indicate an age-to-age factor of approximately 1.068 at 12-to-24 months and slightly less than 
1.00 at 24-to-36 months. The development factors are also fairly stable for received S&S  
(Exhibit I, Sheet 2). We select factors based on the latest five-year volume-weighted average 
factors. In Exhibit I, Sheet 3, we project ultimate S&S based on the development technique 
329

=== PDF PAGE 336 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance 
 
 
described in previous chapters of this book. The format of Exhibit I, Sheet 3 is identical to the 
development projection exhibits of many other chapters. 
 
Many actuaries also use a ratio approach when analyzing S&S. The first step in such an approach 
is to estimate the ultimate claims gross of S&S. In Exhibit I, Sheets 4 through 6, we project 
ultimate claims for Auto Physical Damage Insurer based on reported and paid claims. We rely on 
the five-year volume-weighted averages and select ultimate claims based on the average of the 
reported and paid claims projections (Exhibit I, Sheet 6). It is not surprising that the projections 
are very similar for this fast reporting and settling line of insurance. In Exhibit I, Sheet 7, we use 
the development technique to analyze the ratio of received S&S to paid claims.79  
 
One advantage of the ratio approach is that the development factors tend not to be as highly 
leveraged as the development factors based on received S&S dollars. Another advantage is 
related to the selection of the ultimate S&S ratio(s) for the most recent year(s) in the experience 
period. In Exhibit I, Sheet 8, we use the development technique to project an initial estimate of 
the S&S ratio to claim amount of 0.315 for accident year 2008. However, based on comparison to 
the immediate preceding years, 0.315 seems low. This may be due to a change in procedures for 
recording S&S or an unusually large claim. The average of the ultimate S&S ratios for the last 
five years excluding 2008 is 0.347 and for the last three years excluding 2008 is 0.344. Thus, we 
select an ultimate S&S ratio for 2008 of 0.345. We determine ultimate S&S based on the 
multiplication of selected ultimate claims (from Exhibit I, Sheet 6) and the selected ultimate S&S 
ratio (from Column (6)). 
 
The results of all three projections are summarized in Exhibit I, Sheet 9. In this exhibit, we also 
present the estimated S&S recoverable, which are equal to projected ultimate S&S less received 
S&S. The estimated S&S recoverable represent a reduction to total estimate of unpaid claims for 
the insurer. 
 
  
Reinsurance and Aggregate Limits 
 
All of the different types of techniques for estimating unpaid claims presented in Chapters 7 
through 13 can be applied to gross, ceded, or net of reinsurance claims experience. When required 
to estimate unpaid claims on a net of reinsurance basis, actuaries vary in their approach. Some 
actuaries analyze gross (i.e., direct and assumed) and ceded experience separately; others analyze 
gross and net experience separately. The choice of a gross versus net versus ceded analysis may 
depend on data availability, characteristics of the gross versus ceded program, and also personal 
preferences of the actuary. Some insurers code ceded claims in the same information system as 
the gross data; thus, the net data is readily available. For such insurers, the actuary is more likely 
to conduct both gross and net analyses. On the other hand, some insurers code the ceded claims 
data to a different system; thus matching the gross and ceded data to derive net claim triangles 
may be more difficult. For these insurers, the actuary will likely prepare separate gross and ceded 
analyses. Furthermore, the choice of gross versus net versus ceded analysis may be a function of 
data volume and quality.  
 
                                                 
79 To present a complete example for the reader of this text, we use the development method with paid and 
reported claims to project ultimate claims for Auto Physical Damage. However, we could use many other 
projection methods to derive ultimate claims. The ratio method for determining ultimate S&S is 
independent of any specific methodology for estimating ultimate claims.  
330

=== PDF PAGE 337 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance 
 
 
It is particularly important for a net (of reinsurance) or ceded analysis that the actuary be aware of 
the implied relationships between gross, ceded, and net claims. This is critical at all stages of the 
analysis: 
 
 At the beginning of the analysis when the actuary is reviewing and reconciling the data 
 
 During the analysis especially when the actuary uses judgment in the process of developing 
an unpaid claim estimate 
 
 At the end of the analysis when the actuary evaluates the various projection methods and 
selects ultimate claims and unpaid claim estimates 
 
One of the first checks that an actuary can conduct with the data provided for the analysis of 
unpaid claims is that net claim and net premium data are equal to or less than the gross data. 
Reinsurance arrangements are typically categorized as quota share or excess of loss. If the 
reinsurance program consists of quota share arrangements, the actuary can create a development 
triangle with the ratio of net-to-gross claims and thus test the quota share percentage(s) by year. 
The actuary will want to confirm that the ratios in such a triangle are consistent with information 
available for the insurer and consistent with relationships between net and gross premium. In 
Exhibit II, Sheet 1, we present three triangles for an insurer who has maintained a quota share 
reinsurance program for the past four years. For 2005, the insurer had a 70% quota share 
arrangement; the insurer increased the percentage to 85% in 2007 and to 90% in 2008. We 
present the gross reported claims, the net reported claims, and the ratio of net to gross reported 
claims. 
 
If the reinsurance program consists of excess of loss arrangements, the actuary may want to 
examine large claims to confirm that retentions and limits for ceded claims by year are consistent 
with the corresponding excess of loss reinsurance contracts or with information provided. Such 
verification of the treatment of large claims is an important part of ensuring that the ceded and/or 
net claim triangles are correct. In Exhibit II, Sheet 2, we present three triangles for an insurer who 
maintains $1 million excess of loss reinsurance. In accident year 2005, the insurer sustained two 
large claims in excess of $1 million, and in accident year 2007, one large claim in excess of $1 
million. We present the gross, net, and ceded reported claim triangles in Exhibit II, Sheet 2. 
 
During the analysis, the actuary should ensure that key assumptions, particularly those involving 
actuarial judgment, are consistent between the gross and net or gross and ceded analyses. For 
example, it is generally not reasonable for the tail factor to be larger for net claims than for gross 
claims. Since net claims are often capped due to excess or aggregate coverage, we frequently 
observe net claim development patterns that are less than or equal to gross claim development 
patterns.
80  
 
Actuaries differ in their practice with respect to the order in which they choose gross or net claim 
development factors. Some actuaries first select gross claim development factors since these 
triangles contain a greater volume of claims experience, and thus may be considered to have 
greater credibility. The gross claim development factors may then be used as input for the 
selection of ceded or net claim development factors. On the other hand, it may be that gross 
                                                 
80 This relationship does not hold in some circumstances, such as for an insurance company fronting for a 
captive insurer (where the captive assumes the working layer and the fronting company retains the excess 
layer). There are also situations in which the effect of limiting large claims due to excess coverage may 
result in net factors that are greater than gross factors. 
331

=== PDF PAGE 338 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance 
 
 
claims are subject to more random variation due to large claims, and thus the actuary first selects 
claim development factors for the net claims. In such situations, the actuary may then use the 
selected net claim development factors as input for the selection of gross claim development 
factors. The important point to remember is that there should generally be a reasonable 
relationship between the selected development factors for net and gross claims. It should be 
recognized, however, that this is not always the case. 
 
Similarly, the actuary must consider the reasonableness of trend assumptions between the net and gross 
or ceded and gross analyses as well as expected claim ratios, frequency, and severity assumptions. At 
the final stages of the analysis, when the actuary is selecting ultimate claims, the actuary must review 
the implied relationship between the net and gross claims and resulting estimates of unpaid claims to 
ensure that the ceded claims are reasonable, or alternatively the relationship between gross and ceded 
ultimate claims to ensure that net ultimate claims and unpaid claim estimates are appropriate. A critical 
point is that net IBNR in each accident year is generally not greater than gross IBNR.
81 
 
Many insurers also use aggregate or stop-loss coverage to protect their financial results across multiple 
lines of coverage. This coverage can apply on an accident year, policy year, or calendar year basis. In 
addition to fully understanding how the coverage operates, it is important that the actuary understands 
how the insurer treats prior recoveries from aggregate coverage in the source data used in the actuarial 
analysis of unpaid claims. The actuary will need to determine whether or not he or she should take stop-
loss or aggregate programs into account within the claim development triangles or at a later stage of the 
analysis. The specific circumstances of the stop-loss program could influence the actuary’s decision. 
Typically, the actuary would want data prior to the application of stop-loss or aggregate coverage since 
the actuary will often adjust for such coverage as a final step in the development of the unpaid claim 
estimate.  
 
In Exhibit II, Sheet 3, we present a simple example with one approach for adjusting for the effect of 
excess of loss and stop-loss reinsurance. In this example, we assume that Self-Insurance Pool is an 
association of self-insured municipalities that has maintained a $500,000 per occurrence excess of loss 
coverage since the inception of the pool. The stop-loss coverage, however, has varied over time 
depending on the availability and price of such coverage. For the first three years of Self-Insurance 
Pool, there was a $4 million combined stop-loss (i.e., the stop-loss limit of $4 million applied to the 
sum of ultimate claims for policy years 2002-03 through 2004-05). The stop-loss limit was $1.5 million 
for policy years 2005-06 and 2006-07. There was no stop-loss coverage purchased for 2007-08. For 
Self-Insurance Pool, the actuary first estimates ultimate claims using reported and paid claims limited to 
the per occurrence retention (i.e., $500,000 per occurrence). In Exhibit II, Sheet 3, we summarize the 
selected ultimate claims at $500,000 per occurrence in Column (2) and the stop-loss limits in Column 
(3). In Column (4), we apply the stop-loss limits to derive the estimates of ultimate claims for Self-
Insurance Pool that take into account both the excess of loss and stop-loss coverages. In the final 
columns of this exhibit, we calculate the unpaid claim estimate net of both excess of loss and stop-loss 
coverage. 
 
                                                 
81 There are times when the net IBNR will be greater than the gross IBNR. This occurs when an estimate of 
uncollectible reinsurance is included in the net IBNR but not in the gross IBNR and there are significant 
billed reinsurance amounts for which significant collectibility issues exist. Another example in which net 
IBNR may be greater than gross IBNR is for a runoff book with reinsurance disputes for items such as 
asbestos. 
 
332

=== PDF PAGE 339 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 1
Reported Salvage and Subrogation ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Salvage and Subrogation as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  713  781  771  770  770  785  793  793  793  793  793
1999  1,328  1,369  1,361  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360
2000  2,180  2,432  2,423  2,424  2,421  2,421  2,421  2,421  2,421
2001  3,314  3,674  3,656  3,637  3,635  3,637  3,637  3,637
2002  3,807  4,092  4,085  4,088  4,084  4,085  4,091
2003  4,171  4,323  4,317  4,341  4,360  4,366
2004  4,805  5,166  5,162  5,163  5,160
2005  5,387  5,735  5,731  5,731
2006  5,337  5,752  5,715
2007  5,590  6,031
2008  5,414
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.095 0.987 0.998 1.000 1.019 1.011 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.031 0.995 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.115 0.996 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.109 0.995 0.995 0.999 1.001 1.000 1.000
2002 1.075 0.998 1.001 0.999 1.000 1.001
2003 1.036 0.999 1.006 1.004 1.001
2004 1.075 0.999 1.000 0.999
2005 1.065 0.999 1.000
2006 1.078 0.994
2007 1.079
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.067 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.074 0.997 1.002 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.072 0.999 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.068 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.074 0.997 1.002 1.001 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.068 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.067 0.999 1.001 1.001 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 93.7% 100.1% 99.9% 99.9% 99.9% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_1 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
333

=== PDF PAGE 340 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 2
Received Salvage and Subrogation ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Received Salvage and Subrogation as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  312  735  766  770  770  770  793  793  793  793  793
1999  704  1,324  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360
2000  951  2,356  2,407  2,421  2,421  2,421  2,421  2,421  2,421
2001  2,101  3,591  3,619  3,635  3,635  3,637  3,637  3,637
2002  2,251  4,023  4,082  4,084  4,084  4,084  4,090
2003  2,122  4,264  4,317  4,321  4,360  4,365
2004  2,602  5,100  5,156  5,157  5,160
2005  3,279  5,666  5,731  5,731
2006  3,104  5,493  5,655
2007  2,863  5,957
2008  2,710
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 2.357 1.043 1.004 1.000 1.001 1.030 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.880 1.027 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 2.478 1.022 1.006 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.709 1.008 1.004 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000
2002 1.787 1.015 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.001
2003 2.010 1.012 1.001 1.009 1.001
2004 1.960 1.011 1.000 1.001
2005 1.728 1.011 1.000
2006 1.769 1.029
2007 2.081
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.910 1.016 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.006 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.860 1.017 1.000 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.913 1.013 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.896 1.016 1.001 1.002 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.851 1.017 1.000 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.896 1.016 1.001 1.002 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.938 1.022 1.006 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Received 51.6% 97.8% 99.4% 99.5% 99.7% 99.8% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_2 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
334

=== PDF PAGE 341 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate Salvage and Subrogation ($000)
Age of Projected Ultimate S&S
Accident Accident Year S&S at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Received Reported Received Reported Received
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 132  793  793 1.000 1.000  793  793
1999 120  1,360  1,360 1.000 1.000  1,360  1,360
2000 108  2,421  2,421 1.000 1.000  2,421  2,421
2001 96  3,637  3,637 1.000 1.000  3,637  3,637
2002 84  4,091  4,090 1.000 1.000  4,091  4,090
2003 72  4,366  4,365 1.001 1.002  4,370  4,374
2004 60  5,160  5,160 1.001 1.003  5,165  5,175
2005 48  5,731  5,731 1.001 1.005  5,737  5,760
2006 36  5,715  5,655 1.001 1.006  5,720  5,688
2007 24  6,031  5,957 0.999 1.022  6,025  6,088
2008 12  5,414  2,710 1.067 1.938  5,776  5,252
Total  44,718  41,879  45,096  44,639
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from Auto Physical Damage Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_3 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
335

=== PDF PAGE 342 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 4
Reported Claims Gross of S&S ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  2,412  2,862  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864
1999  4,225  4,677  4,695  4,696  4,697  4,697  4,697  4,697  4,697  4,697
2000  6,968  7,879  7,896  7,900  7,901  7,902  7,902  7,902  7,902
2001  9,063  10,277  10,314  10,318  10,318  10,318  10,319  10,319
2002  9,982  11,115  11,136  11,138  11,139  11,139  11,137
2003  11,396  12,493  12,508  12,527  12,526  12,527
2004  12,878  14,505  14,540  14,544  14,552
2005  15,181  16,815  16,834  16,837
2006  15,117  16,953  16,945
2007  15,092  16,862
2008  14,727
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.187 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.107 1.004 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.131 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.134 1.004 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2002 1.113 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2003 1.096 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.000
2004 1.126 1.002 1.000 1.001
2005 1.108 1.001 1.000
2006 1.121 1.000
2007 1.117
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.114 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.115 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.115 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.114 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.115 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.114 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.115 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 89.7% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_4 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
336

=== PDF PAGE 343 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 5
Paid Claims Gross of S&S ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  1,991  2,858  2,861  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864  2,864
1999  3,558  4,666  4,694  4,696  4,697  4,697  4,697  4,697  4,697  4,697
2000  5,718  7,869  7,893  7,900  7,901  7,902  7,902  7,902  7,902
2001  7,967  10,253  10,307  10,317  10,317  10,318  10,319  10,319
2002  8,745  11,076  11,126  11,134  11,136  11,136  11,137
2003  9,658  12,459  12,500  12,526  12,526  12,526
2004  11,088  14,466  14,503  14,505  14,521
2005  13,518  16,775  16,827  16,837
2006  13,322  16,872  16,942
2007  13,191  16,822
2008  12,889
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.436 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.311 1.006 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.376 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.287 1.005 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2002 1.267 1.005 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
2003 1.290 1.003 1.002 1.000 1.000
2004 1.305 1.003 1.000 1.001
2005 1.241 1.003 1.001
2006 1.266 1.004
2007 1.275
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.275 1.004 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.261 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.277 1.004 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.273 1.004 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.261 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.273 1.004 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.279 1.005 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Paid 78.2% 99.5% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_5 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
337

=== PDF PAGE 344 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 6
Projection of Ultimate Claims Gross of S&S Using Reported and Paid Claims ($000)
Age of Projected Ultimate Claims Selected
Accident Accident Year Claims at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Ult. Claims
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Gross of S&S
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998 132  2,864  2,864 1.000 1.000  2,864  2,864  2,864
1999 120  4,697  4,697 1.000 1.000  4,697  4,697  4,697
2000 108  7,902  7,902 1.000 1.000  7,902  7,902  7,902
2001 96  10,319  10,319 1.000 1.000  10,319  10,319  10,319
2002 84  11,137  11,137 1.000 1.000  11,137  11,137  11,137
2003 72  12,527  12,526 1.000 1.000  12,527  12,526  12,527
2004 60  14,552  14,521 1.000 1.000  14,552  14,521  14,536
2005 48  16,837  16,837 1.000 1.000  16,837  16,837  16,837
2006 36  16,945  16,942 1.000 1.001  16,945  16,959  16,952
2007 24  16,862  16,822 1.001 1.005  16,879  16,906  16,893
2008 12  14,727  12,889 1.115 1.279  16,421  16,485  16,453
Total  129,370  127,456  131,081  131,153  131,117
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from Auto Physical Damage Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 4 and 5.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = [Average of (7) and (8)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_6 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
338

=== PDF PAGE 345 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 7
Ratio of Received Salvage and Subrogation to Paid Claims
PART 1 - Ratio Triangle
Accident Ratio of Received Salvage and Subrogation to Paid Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 0.157            0.257            0.268            0.269            0.269            0.269            0.277            0.277            0.277            0.277            0.277            
1999 0.198            0.284            0.290            0.290            0.290            0.290            0.290            0.290            0.290            0.290            
2000 0.166            0.299            0.305            0.306            0.306            0.306            0.306            0.306            0.306            
2001 0.264            0.350            0.351            0.352            0.352            0.353            0.352            0.352            
2002 0.257            0.363            0.367            0.367            0.367            0.367            0.367            
2003 0.220            0.342            0.345            0.345            0.348            0.348            
2004 0.235            0.353            0.355            0.355            0.355            
2005 0.243            0.338            0.341            0.340            
2006 0.233            0.326            0.334            
2007 0.217            0.354            
2008 0.210            
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.642 1.041 1.003 1.000 1.001 1.030 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.434 1.021 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.801 1.019 1.005 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.328 1.003 1.003 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000
2002 1.411 1.010 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.001
2003 1.558 1.009 0.999 1.009 1.001
2004 1.502 1.008 1.000 1.000
2005 1.393 1.008 0.999
2006 1.397 1.025
2007 1.632
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.496 1.012 1.000 1.002 1.000 1.006 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.474 1.014 0.999 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.486 1.009 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.486 1.009 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.499 1.009 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_7 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
339

=== PDF PAGE 346 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 8
Projection of Ultimate Salvage and Subrogation ($000)
Ratio of
Age of Received S&S to Projected Selected Ultimate Projected
Accident Accident Yea r Paid Claims CDF Ultimate S&S Claims Ultimate
Year at 12/31/08 at 12/31/08 to Ultimate Ratio Ratio Gross of S&S S&S
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 132 0.277 1.000 0.277          0.277            2,864            793             
1999 120 0.290 1.000 0.290          0.290            4,697            1,360          
2000 108 0.306 1.000 0.306          0.306            7,902            2,421          
2001 96 0.352 1.000 0.352          0.352            10,319          3,637          
2002 84 0.367 1.000 0.367          0.367            11,137          4,090          
2003 72 0.348 1.000 0.348          0.348            12,527          4,365          
2004 60 0.355 1.000 0.355          0.355            14,536          5,165          
2005 48 0.340 1.000 0.340          0.340            16,837          5,731          
2006 36 0.334 1.000 0.334          0.334            16,952          5,658          
2007 24 0.354 1.009 0.357          0.357            16,893          6,036          
2008 12 0.210 1.499 0.315          0.345            16,453          5,676          
Total 131,117        44,934        
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) From latest diagonal of triangle in Exhibit I, Sheet 7.
(4) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheet 7.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
(6) = (5) for all years except accident year 2008. Judgmentally selected 0.345 for 2008 based on review of prior years.
(7) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 6.
(8) = [(6) x (7)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_8 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
340

=== PDF PAGE 347 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit I
Auto Physical Damage Insurer Sheet 9
Development of Unpaid Claim Estimate ($000)
Age of Received Projected Ultimate S&S Estimated S&S Recoverables
Accident Accident Yea r S&S Using Dev Method with Using Dev Method with
Year at 12/31/08 at 12/31/08 Reported Received Ratio Reported Received Ratio
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998 132  793  793  793  793 0 0 0
1999 120  1,360  1,360  1,360  1,360  0 0 0
2000 108  2,421  2,421  2,421  2,421 0 0 0
2001 96  3,637  3,637  3,637  3,637  0 0  0
2002 84  4,090  4,091  4,090  4,090  0 0  0
2003 72  4,365  4,370  4,374  4,365  5  9  0
2004 60  5,160  5,165  5,175  5,165  5  15  6
2005 48  5,731  5,737  5,760  5,731  6  29 0
2006 36  5,655  5,720  5,688  5,658  66  34  3
2007 24  5,957  6,025  6,088  6,036  68  131  79
2008 12  2,710  5,776  5,252  5,676  3,066  2,542  2,966
Total  41,879  45,096  44,639  44,934  3,216  2,760  3,054
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) Based on data from Auto Physical Damage Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 8.
(7) = [(4) - (3)].
(8) = [(5) - (3)].
(9) = [(6) - (3)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_1_9 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
341

=== PDF PAGE 348 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit II
Impact of Quota Share Reinsurance Sheet 1
Accident Gross Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   
2005 35,839          42,290          47,365          49,733          
2006 37,452          44,568          49,024          
2007 39,324          46,009          
2008 41,212          
Accident Net Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   
2005 25,087          29,603          33,155          34,813          
2006 26,216          31,197          34,317          
2007 33,426          39,108          
2008 37,091          
Accident Ratio of Net to Gross Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   
2005 0.700            0.700            0.700            0.700            
2006 0.700            0.700            0.700            
2007 0.850            0.850            
2008 0.900            
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_2_1 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
342

=== PDF PAGE 349 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit II
Impact of Excess of Loss Reinsurance Sheet 2
Accident Gross Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   
2005 12,199          15,615          18,425          20,268          
2006 12,992          16,890          20,267          
2007 13,901          17,655          
2008 14,735          
Accident Net Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   
2005 11,752          14,076          16,502          18,056          
2006 12,992          16,890          20,267          
2007 13,644          17,303          
2008 14,735          
Accident Ceded Reported Claims ($000) as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   
2005 447               1,539            1,924            2,212            
2006 -                -                -                
2007 257               352               
2008 -                
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_2_2 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
343

=== PDF PAGE 350 ===
Chapter 14 - Recoveries: Salvage and Subrogation and Reinsurance Exhibit II
Impact of Reinsurance Programs Sheet 3
Self-Insurance Pool with Excess of Loss and Stop Loss Reinsurance
Ultimate Claims Net of Excess of Loss, Net of Stop Loss
Policy Net of Excess of Loss Stop Loss Ultimate Claims at 12/31/08 Estimated Unpaid Claim
Year Gross of Stop Loss Limit Claims Reported Paid IBNR Estimate
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
2002 - 03 1,184,999                  
2003 - 04 1,770,725                  4,000,000      4,000,000      3,753,248      3,253,624      246,752         746,376         
2004 - 05 1,306,107                  
2005 - 06 2,168,077                  1,500,000      1,500,000      1,500,000      1,016,783      -                  483,217         
2006 - 07 1,137,216                  1,500,000      1,137,216      914,262         629,296         222,954         507,920         
2007 - 08 1,364,048                  N/A 1,364,048      432,679         257,877         931,369         1,106,171      
Total 8,931,172                  8,001,264      6,600,189      5,157,579      1,401,075      2,843,685      
Column Notes:
(2) Selected based on review of various projection techniques.
(3) Based on Self-Insurance Pool stop-loss reinsurance program.
(4) = [minimum of (2) and (3)].
(5) and (6) Based on Self-Insurance Pool experience.
(7) = [(4) - (5)].
(8) = [(4) - (6)].
Exhibits Combined.xls 14_2_3 22/07/2009 - 10:01 AM
344

=== PDF PAGE 351 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
CHAPTER 15 – EVALUATION OF TECHNIQUES 
 
 
In this final chapter in Part 3, we bring together the various methods for estimating unpaid claims 
used for the examples presented in Chapters 7 through 14. We use numerous methodologies for 
the same examples, not simply for the purpose of demonstration, but because actuaries should use 
more than one method when analyzing unpaid claims. No single method can produce the best 
estimate in all situations. In their 1977 paper, Berquist and Sherman recommend that where 
possible, the actuary conducting an analysis of unpaid claims should use methods that incorporate 
the following: 
 
 Projections of reported claims 
 Projections of paid claims 
 Projections of ultimate reported claim counts and severities 
 Estimates of the number and average amount of outstanding claims 
 Claim ratio estimates
82 
 
Berquist and Sherman further recommend that wherever possible the actuary should incorporate 
the concepts of credibility, regression analysis, and data smoothing into the actuarial methods 
used. They state: “The methods applied should range from those which are highly stable (i.e., 
representative of the average of experience over several years) to those which are highly 
responsive to trends and to more recent experience.” It is then the responsibility of the actuary to 
select the most appropriate estimate of unpaid claims. In some situations, actuaries may 
incorporate the concept of credibility into the selection process; at other times actuarial judgment 
will prevail. When incorporating regression analysis into a method, Berquist and Sherman 
recommend using some measure of the goodness-of-fit to evaluate the appropriateness of that 
method’s projections.  
 
In “Reinsurance,” Patrik comments on the selection process of techniques for the analysis of 
unpaid claims: 
 
You can see there are many possibilities, and no single right method. Any good 
actuary will want to use as many legitimate methods for which reasonably good 
information and time is available, and compare and contrast the estimates from 
these methods. As with pricing, it is often informative to see the spread of 
estimates derived from different approaches. This helps us understand better the 
range and distribution of possibilities, and may give us some idea of the 
sensitivity of our answers to varying assumptions and varying estimation 
methodologies.
83 
 
If there is sufficient claim history available, testing the method retroactively is one method for 
evaluating the appropriateness of a particular technique for estimating unpaid claims. The actuary 
can then determine the historical accuracy of the method and whether or not the particular method 
is free from bias in projecting future results. 
 
                                                 
82 PCAS, 1977. 
 
83 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001.  
345

=== PDF PAGE 352 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
The actuary should explain significant differences between the projections of various methods. 
Often such differences are due to changes in company operations and procedures or to changes in 
the external environment. Ronald Wiser notes in “Loss Reserving”84 that the attempt to reconcile 
a number of different estimates is extremely difficult, but often yields important new insights for 
the actuary.  
 
An important final check of the selected ultimate claims, particularly for the most recent years, 
should include calculation of claim ratios, severities, pure premiums, and claim frequencies. Such 
a review is consistent with Mr. Wiser’s recommendations that proposed ultimate amounts be 
evaluated in contexts outside their original frame of analysis. If exposures are not available, the 
actuary can compare ultimate claim counts with premiums as a proxy for frequency. Another 
valuable test for the actuary is the implied average case outstanding and unreported claim on open 
and unreported claims. The actuary should review these statistics for reasonableness from the 
perspective of year-to-year changes, knowledge gained from meetings with management, and 
knowledge of the industry in general. Such review should either result in the actuary having 
greater confidence in the unpaid claim estimate or lead the actuary to seek additional information 
before reaching a conclusion. 
 
In Chapters 7 through 14, we present numerous examples for insurers and self-insurers providing 
coverage for many different lines of insurance. In the following sections of this chapter, we 
review the results for many of these examples. We conclude this chapter with a brief discussion 
of monitoring and interim testing of unpaid claim estimates. 
 
 
U.S. Industry Auto 
 
For U.S. Industry Auto, the results of the various projection techniques are all quite consistent. 
This is not surprising given the volume of business.  This example is based on the consolidated 
results for all U.S. private passenger automobile insurance. The following table summarizes the 
estimated IBNR and the total unpaid claim estimate (in billions of dollars) for each of the 
projection techniques. 
 
 Estimated Unpaid Claims 
as of 12/31/07 
$ Billions IBNR Total 
Development – Reported 26 71 
Development – Paid 29 74 
Expected Claims 26 71 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson – Reported 26 71 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson – Paid 27 73 
Cape Cod 27 73 
Case Outstanding Development 24 70 
 
In total and by accident year, the methods produce unpaid claims that are similar to one another. 
 
 
                                                 
84 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001. 
346

=== PDF PAGE 353 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
XYZ Insurer 
 
While we do not expect to see material differences in the various estimates of unpaid claims for 
U.S. Industry Auto, we do expect significant differences in results for XYZ Insurer. We know 
that the underlying assumptions of some of the methods do not hold true for XYZ Insurer as a 
result of recent changes in both its internal operations as well as the external environment. To 
demonstrate the influence of the Berquist-Sherman adjustments on the projected ultimate claims, 
we summarize in Exhibit I, Sheet 1, the projected ultimate claims from the following methods: 
 
 Reported and paid claim development techniques based on unadjusted reported and paid claims 
 
 Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique based on unadjusted reported and paid claim development 
patterns 
 
 Cape Cod method based on unadjusted reported claim development pattern 
 
 Reported and paid claim development techniques incorporating Berquist-Sherman 
adjustments to case outstanding only, paid claims only, as well as to both case outstanding 
and paid claims 
 
 Bornhuetter-Ferguson based on adjusted reported and paid claim development patterns as 
well as revised expected claim ratios 
 
The calculations for the revised Bornhuetter-Ferguson incorporating the Berquist-Sherman 
adjustments on development patterns and the expected claim ratio are not included in this book. 
We suggest that the user of this book reproduce these calculations to ensure a greater 
understanding of the mechanics of each method. 
 
Since we know that using unadjusted data does not satisfy the underlying assumptions for the first 
three projection techniques above, we do not consider these projections when selecting ultimate 
claims for XYZ Insurer. We also do not consider the Berquist-Sherman adjustment for case 
outstanding only since this projection does not reflect the changes observed in settlement rates.  
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 2 through 6, we present exhibits that will assist us in selecting ultimate claims 
by accident year. We present the following: 
 
 Exhibit I, Sheet 2 – Summary of Ultimate Claims 
 Exhibit I, Sheet 3 – Comparison of Estimated Ultimate Claim Ratios 
 Exhibit I, Sheet 4 – Comparison of Estimated Ultimate Severities 
 Exhibit I, Sheet 5 – Comparison of Estimated Average Case Outstanding and Unreported 
Claims 
 Exhibit I, Sheet 6 – Comparison of Estimated IBNR 
 
Each of these exhibits contains details by accident year. For some techniques, such as the 
frequency-severity approaches (#2 and #3), we only estimate ultimate claims for the recent 
accident years. For other techniques, we project ultimate claims for all accident years in the  
experience period (i.e., 1998 through 2008).  In Exhibit I, Sheets 2 through 6, we summarize the  
347

=== PDF PAGE 354 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
results for the following methods: 
 
 Reported and paid claim development techniques incorporating Berquist-Sherman 
adjustments to paid claims only as well as to both case outstanding and paid claims  
 
 Bornhuetter-Ferguson based on adjusted reported and paid claim development patterns as 
well as revised expected claim ratios 
 
 All three frequency-severity projections (from Chapter 11) 
 
We recall from Chapter 11, that there are concerns about the first frequency-severity approach for 
XYZ Insurer. We believe that the incorporation of closed claim counts into the selection of 
ultimate claim counts may overstate the true value of projected ultimate claims. We observe that 
this projection method results in significantly higher ultimate claims than all other methods 
summarized in Exhibit I, Sheet 2. The estimate of total ultimate claims for all accident years 
combined from frequency-severity approach method 1 is $551,155; the total ultimate claims for 
all other methods are less than $490,000. Thus, we exclude the frequency-severity method 1 from 
further consideration. 
 
For the oldest seven years, 1998 through 2004, we observe fairly consistent results from the 
various projection methods. However, beginning in 2005, the differences become more 
substantial. A review of the estimated ultimate claim ratios and ultimate severities as well as the 
estimated IBNR can assist the actuary in the selection of ultimate claims. Another valuable 
statistic is the estimated average case outstanding and unreported claim on open and IBNR 
claims. 
 
There are many acceptable ways to select ultimate claims in such an example. Some actuaries 
may select one method and use it for all years. The Berquist-Sherman adjusted reported claim 
(both case and paid adjustments) method may be a reasonable selection for all years for XYZ 
Insurer. Alternatively, an actuary may select different methods for different accident years. For 
example, select the Berquist-Sherman adjusted reported claim method for accident years 1998 
through 2006 and the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method for 2007 and 2008. Another alternative is for 
the actuary to use a weighted average based on assigned weights to the various methods; these 
weights may be consistent for all years or may vary by accident year. The important point is that 
there is no single “right” way for the actuary to select ultimate claims (and thus the unpaid claim 
estimate). The actuary must take into consideration the results of the various techniques, 
diagnostic tests including implied claim ratios and severities, and all the information gained 
during the process of estimating unpaid claims. As stated earlier in this chapter, to the extent 
sufficient data is available, retroactive tests may also prove valuable to the actuary when selecting 
which methods to rely on for selecting ultimate claims. 
 
For our example, we select ultimate claims based on: the Berquist-Sherman adjusted reported 
claim for accident years 1998 through 2004; the average of the adjusted reported and paid 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques for accident years 2005 and 2006; the adjusted reported 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique for accident year 2007; and the average of the adjusted reported 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique and frequency-severity approach #2 for accident year 2008. The 
key drivers in our selections by accident year are the estimated IBNR, the estimated ultimate 
severities, and the estimated claim ratios. Later in this chapter, we will return to these selected 
ultimate claims when we present an example for monitoring the unpaid claim estimate on a 
quarterly basis. 
348

=== PDF PAGE 355 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
Changing Conditions – Changes in Claim Ratios and Case Outstanding Adequacy 
and Changes in Product Mix 
 
In Chapters 7 through 10, we present various scenarios related to changes in claim ratios and case 
outstanding adequacy based on a U.S. private passenger automobile example. For the first 
scenario, U.S. PP Auto Steady-State, all of the techniques produced an accurate estimate of 
unpaid claims. In this scenario, we assume that there are no changes in the underlying claim ratio 
or the strength of case outstanding. In the next three scenarios (U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim 
Ratios, U.S. PP Auto Increasing Case Outstanding Strength, and U.S. PP Auto Increasing Claim 
Ratios and Case Outstanding Strength) the estimation techniques vary in their ability to 
accurately respond to the changing conditions.   
 
We also create an example based on a combined portfolio of private passenger and commercial 
automobile insurance. Similar to the U.S. PP Auto Steady-State, all of the techniques used for the 
example with a steady-state product mix (U.S. Auto Steady-State) produce the actual IBNR 
value. When the product mix changes, however, the methods respond differently to the changing 
conditions. 
 
The following table summarizes the estimated IBNR for each of the projection techniques for all 
of the scenarios other than steady-state examples. The first line of the table shows the actual 
IBNR needed for each scenario.  
 
Estimated IBNR ($000) 
 
 
 
Estimation Technique 
 
Increasing 
Claim 
Ratios 
Increasing  
Case 
Outstanding 
Strength 
Increasing Claim  
Ratios and  
Case Outstanding  
Strength 
 
Changing 
Product 
Mix 
True IBNR 602 253 348 2,391 
Development – Reported 602 501 694 2,153 
Development – Paid 602 253 348 1,723 
Expected Claims -843 253 -1,097 2,167 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson – Reported 439 458 460 2,168 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson – Paid 159 253 -96 1,991 
Benktander – Reported 573 492 648 2,159 
Benktander – Paid 406 253 151 1,893 
Cape Cod 506 470 546 2,168 
 
For each of these scenarios, there is considerable variability between the methods in total and by 
accident year. In such a situation, it is very important that the actuary seek to understand what the 
drivers are for the differences between methods. The actuary might require more information from 
management as well as further quantitative analysis to determine which method is most appropriate 
for the particular circumstances. In these types of situations, the availability of claim counts and the 
ability to test the estimated ultimate severities could prove very valuable to the actuary. 
 
 
349

=== PDF PAGE 356 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
Berq-Sher Insurers 
 
The Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer and Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer are copies of examples presented 
in the Berquist and Sherman paper “Loss Reserve Adequacy Testing: A Comprehensive, 
Systematic Approach.”85 In Exhibit II, we summarize the results of the various projection 
methods for Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer; and in Exhibit III, we summarize the results for Berq-
Sher Auto BI Insurer.  
 
For Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer, we develop ultimate claims using the development technique 
applied to unadjusted reported and paid claims. We also use the development technique with 
adjusted reported claims, whereby claims are adjusted to reflect changes in case outstanding 
adequacy. In Exhibit II, we compare ultimate claims and estimated IBNR. We are limited in the 
diagnostics we can perform for both the Berquist-Sherman examples since we do not have 
complete claim count data. 
 
In our analysis, it is clear from the diagnostics that an increase in case outstanding strength 
occurred during the experience period. Thus, the development method based on unadjusted 
reported claims is not appropriate since an underlying assumption of this technique is not valid 
(i.e., case outstanding adequacy did not remain constant over the experience period). Since the 
two remaining methods (i.e., unadjusted paid claim development and adjusted reported claim 
development) produce such significant differences, the actuary should seek additional 
information, including the potential use of other methodologies, before making a final 
determination as to ultimate claims and thus the unpaid claim estimate. 
 
For Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer, we develop four estimates of ultimate claims using the 
development technique. First, we project ultimate claims based on unadjusted paid claims data. 
We then adjust the paid claims data for changes in the rate of claims settlement and develop three 
alternative sets of claim development factors. In Exhibit III, we summarize ultimate claims and 
estimated ultimate severities for each of the four projections. All three of the projections based on 
the adjusted paid claim triangle are similar to one another, in total and by accident year. The 
results of the Berquist-Sherman adjustment are consistent with our expectations due to our 
conclusion of a decrease in the rate of claims settlement.  
 
While the three projections based on adjusted paid claims are similar to one another, we do not 
consider these methods to necessarily be independent since they are based on the same source 
data. Ideally, the actuary would incorporate other techniques to verify the results of the Berquist-
Sherman adjusted paid claims methodology. 
 
 
Monitoring and Interim Techniques for Unpaid Claim Estimates 
 
We begin Part 2 of this book by presenting Ronald Wiser’s four-phase approach to estimating 
unpaid claims. His final phase is monitoring projections of the development of unpaid claims 
over subsequent calendar periods. He notes that deviations of actual development from projected 
development of claims or claim counts are one of the most useful diagnostic tools for evaluating 
the accuracy of the unpaid claim estimate. 
 
Monitoring performance between detailed analyses of unpaid claims is important both for 
commercial insurers and self-insurers. Many actuaries build models to capture the difference 
                                                 
85 PCAS, 1977. 
350

=== PDF PAGE 357 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
between actual and expected claims reported (or paid) in the month or quarter. While some 
actuaries at very large companies may perform detailed analyses of unpaid claims on a quarterly 
basis, many use “roll-forward” types of analyses to capture and compare actual claims with 
expected claims between complete, detailed analyses. In addition to measuring changes in claims 
for historical periods, the actuary must incorporate the effect of changes in the exposure for the 
current period to any changes in the unpaid claim estimate used for financial reporting purposes. 
 
Comparisons of actual-to-expected claims are valuable so that the actuary can understand the 
appropriateness of prior selections and make revisions as necessary if actual claims do not emerge 
as expected. Monitoring unpaid claims can be important for insurers from a financial reporting 
perspective, for budgeting and planning purposes, for pricing and other strategic decision-making, 
and for planning for the next complete analysis of unpaid claims.  
 
It is typically a simple exercise to develop a model that allows comparisons of actual and 
expected claims by accident year between successive annual valuations. We present an example 
of such a model in Exhibit IV. For DC Insurer, we derive ultimate claims at December 31, 2007 
based on the reported claim development technique. In Exhibit IV, Sheet 3, we use the selected 
ultimate claims and the selected reporting pattern to compare actual reported claims one year later 
(i.e., December 31, 2008) with our expected claims for the year.  
 
For each accident year, expected reported claims in the calendar year are equal to: 
 
  [(ultimate claims selected at December 31, 2007 – actual reported claims at December 31, 2007)  
    / (% unreported at December 31, 2007)] x (% reported at December 31, 2008 - % reported at 
    December 31, 2007) 
 
We derive the percentage unreported from the selected claim development pattern as [1.00 – 
(1.00 / cumulative claim development factor)]. For example, the expected reported claims for 
accident year 2007 during calendar year 2008 are equal to: 
 
AY
07 Expected ClaimCY08 = {[($2,798 – $2,463) / (1 – 0.880)] x (0.999 – 0.880)} = $332 
 
The expected reported claims for accident year 2006 during calendar year 2008 are equal to: 
 
AY
06 Expected ClaimCY08 = {[($2,952 – $2,949) / (1 – 0.999)] x (1.000 – 0.999)} = $3 
 
In the example for DC Insurer, we derive the reporting pattern based on the development factors 
to ultimate. This is a reasonable approach when selected ultimate claims for all accident years are 
based on the reported claim development technique. However, actuaries often rely on techniques 
other than the development technique to select ultimate claims. In such situations, it is often 
valuable to look at an alternative method for deriving reporting and payment patterns (other than 
the inverse of the cumulative development factor). A method often used to derive payment 
patterns is to compare the historical paid claim development triangle to the final value of selected 
ultimate claims. We present such a comparison for XYZ Insurer in Exhibit V, Sheet 1. Various 
averages of the percentage paid at each maturity are calculated and a payment pattern is selected. 
We present similar calculations for the reporting pattern in Exhibit V, Sheet 2.  
351

=== PDF PAGE 358 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
In the table below, we compare the implied payment and reporting patterns based on the 
unadjusted development patterns, the development patterns after Berquist-Sherman adjustments, 
and the final selections from Exhibit V, Sheets 1 and 2. 
 
Comparison of Reporting and Payment Patterns 
 Reporting Patterns Payment Patterns 
Maturity 
Age 
Unadjusted 
CDF 
Adjusted 
CDF 
 
Selected 
Unadjusted 
CDF 
Adjusted 
CDF 
 
Selected 
12 39.2% 44.9% 51.1% 4.5% 7.4% 8.5% 
24 66.1% 74.3% 75.8% 15.2% 30.8% 22.4% 
36 83.6% 91.4% 88.7% 31.6% 44.1% 38.1% 
48 92.2% 99.0% 95.8% 49.8% 58.3% 55.5% 
60 94.0% 99.3% 97.1% 65.6% 74.0% 72.9% 
72 98.7% 100.0% 98.9% 78.9% 89.2% 84.4% 
 
It can be a challenging task to develop a system for quarterly or monthly monitoring given an 
estimation process that focuses only on annual claim development patterns. Some insurers 
maintain claim development data on a quarterly basis. For these organizations, development 
factors are readily available for quarterly analyses, and linear interpolation between quarters is 
likely sufficient for monthly monitoring purposes. However, for insurers who only have annual 
claim development data, linear interpolation of annual development patterns is usually not 
appropriate, particularly for the most immature accident years.  
 
In the paper “The Actuary and IBNR,” Bornhuetter and Ferguson suggest:  
 
In the absence of data, it might be reasonable to assume that the cumulative 
distribution of development by quarter for the most recent accident year is 
skewed say 40% at three months, 70% at six months, 85% at nine months, 100% 
at 12 months, and that the distribution for prior accident years is uniform: 25%, 
50%, 75%, 100%. Upon further study the authors were somewhat surprised to 
find that their data revealed prior year’s development were also skewed; 
approximate distribution: 33%, 60%, 80%, 100%. The data reviewed were excess 
of loss and it is recognized that distributions observed may not be typical of 
ordinary business.
86 
 
For our example, we assume that DC Insurer has the systems capability to capture claim 
development data on a quarterly basis. Thus, we are able to build a model for monthly claims 
monitoring based on linear interpolation of the quarterly claim development factors. In Exhibit 
IV, Sheet 4, we present the template for January and February 2008.  
 
In his 1973 review of the Bornhuetter and Ferguson’s paper “The Actuary and IBNR,” Hugh 
White offered a problem that is still relevant for actuaries monitoring unpaid claims today. Mr. 
White stated:  
 
You are trying to establish the reserve for commercial automobile bodily injury 
and the reported proportion of expected losses as of statement date for the current 
accident year period is 8% higher than it should be. Do you: 
 
                                                 
86 PCAS, 1972. 
352

=== PDF PAGE 359 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 15 – Evaluation of Techniques 
 
 
1. Reduce the bulk (i.e., IBNR) reserve a corresponding amount (because 
you sense an acceleration in the rate of report); 
 
2. Leave the bulk reserve at the same percentage level of expected losses 
(because you sense a random fluctuation such as a large loss); or 
 
3. Increase the bulk reserve in proportion to the increase of actual reported 
over expected reported (because you don’t have 100% confidence in 
your “expected losses”)? 
 
Obviously, none of the three suggested “answers” is satisfactory without further 
extensive investigation, and yet, all are reasonable.
87 
 
While his comments are directed at limitations in the expected claims component of the 
Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique, in our opinion they are more applicable to an actuary 
monitoring unpaid claims and trying to determine the consequences that differences in expected 
and actual claims will have on the unpaid claim estimate. As Mr. White notes, there is no single 
“satisfactory” answer as to how an increase in reported claims should be addressed in establishing 
the unpaid claim estimate. In an effort to best understand the drivers underlying the greater-than-
expected claims, the actuary must seek a comprehensive understanding of the specific situation. 
Such understanding can be achieved through meetings with management and other parties who 
understand the situation at-hand and through detailed analyses of the claims and claims 
experience.
                                                 
87 PCAS, 1973. 
353

=== PDF PAGE 360 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Unadjusted Projections for Ultimate Claims Adjusted Projections for Ultimate Claims
Accident Development Method B-F Method Cape Cod Development Method B-F Method
Year Reported Paid  Reported Paid  Method Case Rptd Both Rptd Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1998  15,822  15,980  15,822  15,977  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,822  15,975
1999  25,082  25,164  25,107  25,158  25,107  25,107  25,107  25,140  25,107  25,128
2000  36,948  37,922  37,246  37,841  37,246  37,246  37,246  37,334  37,246  37,294
2001  38,487  40,600  38,798  40,525  38,798  38,798  38,798  39,290  38,798  39,274
2002  48,313  49,592  48,312  49,417  48,313  48,169  48,169  47,326  48,169  47,313
2003  44,950  49,858  45,068  50,768  45,062  44,373  44,373  44,078  44,373  45,070
2004  74,787  80,537  75,492  82,593  74,754  70,288  70,780  71,401  70,792  71,688
2005  76,661  80,333  79,129  94,301  77,931  70,655  71,362  68,685  71,554  77,898
2006  58,370  72,108  60,404  71,205  58,759  50,756  53,392  51,776  53,906  56,031
2007  47,979  77,941  45,221  45,636  43,307  38,237  42,680  38,549  40,300  34,988
2008  47,530  74,995  42,607  41,049  39,201  37,227  41,531  45,987  36,842  33,988
Total  514,929  605,030  513,207  554,471  504,300  476,678  489,258  485,546  482,910  484,648
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Developed in Chapter 7, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 9, Exhibit II, Sheet 1.
(6) Developed in Chapter 10, Exhibit II, Sheet 2.
(7) through (9) Developed in Chapter 13, Exhibit III, Sheet 10.
(10) and (11) Developed using projected ultimate claims in (8) as the new intial expected claims estimates.
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_1_1 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
354

=== PDF PAGE 361 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Summary of Ultimate Claims ($000)
Adjusted Projections for Ultimate Claims Projections for Ultimate Claims Selected
Accident Claims as of 12/31/08 Development Method B-F Method Frequency-Severity Ultimate
Year Reported Paid Both Rptd Paid  Reported Paid Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1998  15,822  15,822  15,822  15,980  15,822  15,975  15,822  15,822
1999  25,107  24,817  25,107  25,140  25,107  25,128  25,082  25,107
2000  37,246  36,782  37,246  37,334  37,246  37,294  37,083  37,246
2001  38,798  38,519  38,798  39,290  38,798  39,274  38,778  39,192  38,798
2002  48,169  44,437  48,169  47,326  48,169  47,313  48,655  46,869  48,169
2003  44,373  39,320  44,373  44,078  44,373  45,070  46,107  44,479  44,373
2004  70,288  52,811  70,780  71,401  70,792  71,688  76,620  71,906  70,780
2005  70,655  40,026  71,362  68,685  71,554  77,898  80,745  71,684  74,726
2006  48,804  22,819  53,392  51,776  53,906  56,031  64,505  49,913  54,968
2007  31,732  11,865  42,680  38,549  40,300  34,988  58,516  30,512  31,805  40,300
2008  18,632  3,409  41,531  45,987  36,842  33,988  59,242  30,140  29,828  33,491
Total  449,626  330,629  489,258  485,546  482,910  484,648  551,155  483,781
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Chapter 13, Exhibit III, Sheet 10.
(6) and (7) Developed using projected ultimate claims in (4) as the new intial expected claims estimates.
(8) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit II, Sheet 6.
(9) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit IV, Sheet 3.
(10) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit VI, Sheet 8.
(11) = (4) for AYs 2004 and prior; (11) = [Average of (6) and (7) for 2005 and 2006]; (11) = (6) for 2007; (11) = [Average of (6) and (9)] for 2008.
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_1_2 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
355

=== PDF PAGE 362 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 3
Comparison of Estimated Ultimate Claim Ratios
Estimated Ultimate Claim Ratios Based on Selected
Accident Earned Development Method B-F Method Frequency-Severity Ult. Claims
Year Premium  Both Rptd Paid  Reported Paid Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Ratios
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998  20,000 79.1% 79.9% 79.1% 79.9% 79.1% 79.1%
1999  31,500 79.7% 79.8% 79.7% 79.8% 79.6% 79.7%
2000  45,000 82.8% 83.0% 82.8% 82.9% 82.4% 82.8%
2001  50,000 77.6% 78.6% 77.6% 78.5% 77.6% 78.4% 77.6%
2002  61,183 78.7% 77.4% 78.7% 77.3% 79.5% 76.6% 78.7%
2003  69,175 64.1% 63.7% 64.1% 65.2% 66.7% 64.3% 64.1%
2004  99,322 71.3% 71.9% 71.3% 72.2% 77.1% 72.4% 71.3%
2005  138,151 51.7% 49.7% 51.8% 56.4% 58.4% 51.9% 54.1%
2006  107,578 49.6% 48.1% 50.1% 52.1% 60.0% 46.4% 51.1%
2007  62,438 68.4% 61.7% 64.5% 56.0% 93.7% 48.9% 50.9% 64.5%
2008  47,797 86.9% 96.2% 77.1% 71.1% 123.9% 63.1% 62.4% 70.1%
Total  732,144 66.8% 66.3% 66.0% 66.2% 75.3% 66.1%
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) through (10) = [(projected ultimate claims in Exhibit I, Sheet 2) / (2)].evaluation exhibits.xls 15_1_3 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
356

=== PDF PAGE 363 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 4
Comparison of Estimated Ultimate Severities
Estimated Ultimate Severities Based on Selected
Accident Ultimate Development Method B-F Method Frequency-Severity Ultimate
Year Claim Counts Both Rptd Paid  Reported Paid Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Severities
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998  637  24,839  25,087  24,839  25,078  24,839  24,839
1999  1,047  23,980  24,011  23,980  24,000  23,956  23,980
2000  1,416  26,304  26,365  26,304  26,338  26,189  26,304
2001  1,466  26,465  26,801  26,465  26,790  26,452  26,734  26,465
2002  1,565  30,779  30,240  30,779  30,232  31,090  29,948  30,779
2003  1,666  26,634  26,457  26,634  27,053  27,675  26,698  26,634
2004  2,309  30,654  30,923  30,659  31,047  33,183  31,142  30,654
2005  2,483  28,740  27,662  28,817  31,373  32,519  28,870  30,095
2006  1,807  29,547  28,653  29,832  31,008  35,697  27,622  30,420
2007  1,556  27,429  24,775  25,900  22,486  37,606  19,609  20,440  25,900
2008  1,426  29,124  32,249  25,836  23,835  41,544  21,136  20,918  23,486
Total  17,378  28,154  27,940  27,789  27,889  31,716  27,839
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in Chapter 11, Exhibit II, Sheet 3.
(3) through (10) = [(projected ultimate claims in Exhibit I, Sheet 2) x 1000 / (2)].evaluation exhibits.xls 15_1_4 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
357

=== PDF PAGE 364 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 5
Comparison of Estimated Average Case Outstanding and Unreported Claims
Open and Estimated Average Case Outstanding and Unreported Claims Based on Selected
Accident IBNR Counts Development Method B-F Method Frequency-Severity Ultimate
Year at 12/31/08 Both Rptd Paid  Reported Paid Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 Average
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998 0 - - - - - -
1999  3  96,618  107,540  96,618  103,768  88,249  96,618
2000  14  33,181  39,409  33,181  36,581  21,541  33,181
2001  20  13,908  38,519  13,908  37,750  12,938  33,619  13,908
2002  42  88,842  68,772  88,842  68,468  100,425  57,899  88,842
2003  98  51,555  48,549  51,555  58,674  69,248  52,638  51,555
2004  280  64,176  66,391  64,219  67,418  85,031  68,196  64,176
2005  537  58,352  53,369  58,710  70,525  75,826  58,953  64,617
2006  606  50,450  47,784  51,299  54,805  68,789  44,710  53,052
2007  765  40,280  34,882  37,170  30,226  60,981  24,375  26,065  37,170
2008  1,150  33,149  37,025  29,073  26,591  48,551  23,245  22,973  26,159
Total  3,515  530,511  542,240  524,574  554,805  631,578  529,277
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) through (10) = {[(estimated IBNR in Exhibit I, Sheet 6) + ((2) in Exhibit I, Sheet 6)] x 1000 / (2)}.
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_1_5 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
358

=== PDF PAGE 365 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 6
Comparison of Estimated IBNR ($000)
Case Estimated IBNR Based on
Accident Outstanding Development Method B-F Method Frequency-Severity Selected
Year at 12/31/08 Both Rptd Paid  Reported Paid Method 1 Method 2 Method 3 IBNR
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
1998 0 0  158 0  152 0 0
1999  290 0  33 0  21 - 25 0
2000  465 0  87 0  48 - 163 0
2001  278 0  492 0  477 - 19  394 0
2002  3,731 0 - 843 0 - 856  486 - 1,300 0
2003  5,052 0 - 295 0  698  1,734  106 0
2004  17,477  492  1,112  504  1,400  6,331  1,618  492
2005  30,629  707 - 1,970  899  7,243  10,090  1,029  4,071
2006  25,985  4,588  2,972  5,102  7,227  15,701  1,109  6,164
2007  19,867  10,948  6,817  8,568  3,256  26,784 - 1,220  73  8,568
2008  15,223  22,899  27,355  18,210  15,356  40,610  11,508  11,196  14,859
Total  118,997  39,632  35,920  33,284  35,022  101,529  34,155
Column Notes:
(2) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(3) through (10) = [(projected ultimate claims in Exhibit I, Sheet 2) - ((2) in Exhibit I, Sheet 2)].evaluation exhibits.xls 15_1_6 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
359

=== PDF PAGE 366 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit II
Berq-Sher Med Mal Insurer
Summary of Ultimate Claims and Estimated IBNR
Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated IBNR Based on
Accident Claims as of 12/31/76 Development Method Berq-Sher Development Method Berq-Sher
Year Reported Paid Reported Paid  Adj Rptd Reported Paid  Adj Rptd
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1969  23,506,000  15,815,000  23,506,000  23,501,090  23,506,000 0 - 4,910 0
1970  32,216,000  18,983,000  33,085,832  35,289,397  31,539,464  869,832  3,073,397 - 676,536
1971  48,377,000  17,707,000  52,247,160  46,321,512  45,667,888  3,870,160 - 2,055,488 - 2,709,112
1972  61,163,000  18,518,000  79,695,389  83,238,410  61,468,815  18,532,389  22,075,410  305,815
1973  73,733,000  11,292,000  112,369,092  99,064,716  68,571,690  38,636,092  25,331,716 - 5,161,310
1974  63,477,000  6,267,000  145,425,807  134,978,646  79,092,342  81,948,807  71,501,646  15,615,342
1975  48,904,000  1,565,000  215,275,408  125,021,590  93,455,544  166,371,408  76,117,590  44,551,544
1976  15,791,000  209,000  175,990,695  103,266,273  117,879,815  160,199,695  87,475,273  102,088,815
Total  367,167,000  90,356,000  837,595,383  650,681,634  521,181,558  470,428,383  283,514,634  154,014,558
Column Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on medical malpractice insurance experience.
(4) through (6) Developed in Chapter 13, Exhibit I, Sheet 8.
(7) = [(4) - (2)].
(8) = [(5) - (2)].
(9) = [(6) - (2)].
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_2 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
360

=== PDF PAGE 367 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit III
Berq-Sher Auto BI Insurer
Summary of Ultimate Claims and Estimated Ultimate Severities
Paid Projected Ultimate Claims Estimated Ultimate Severities Based on
Accident Claims Paid Claims Berquist-Sherman Adjusted Paid Ultimate Paid Claims Berquist-Sherman Adjusted Paid
Year at 12/31/76 Dev Method  Dev Method Lin Reg Exp Reg Claim Counts  Dev Method  Dev Method Lin Reg Exp Reg
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1969  10,256  10,256  10,256  10,256  10,256  7,821  1,311  1,311  1,311  1,311
1970  12,031  12,103  12,103  12,107  12,107  8,682  1,394  1,394  1,395  1,395
1971  14,235  14,577  14,591  14,583  14,583  9,945  1,466  1,467  1,466  1,466
1972  15,383  16,321  16,506  16,502  16,502  9,690  1,684  1,703  1,703  1,703
1973  15,278  17,631  18,257  18,059  18,061  9,591  1,838  1,904  1,883  1,883
1974  11,771  16,232  17,974  17,241  17,251  7,803  2,080  2,304  2,210  2,211
1975  9,182  18,281  21,559  20,984  20,993  8,050  2,271  2,678  2,607  2,608
1976  2,801  17,282  20,772  21,346  21,394  7,466  2,315  2,782  2,859  2,865
Total  90,937  122,684  132,019  131,079  131,147  69,047  1,777  1,912  1,898  1,899
Column Notes:
(2) Based on automobile bodily injurty experience.
(3) through (6) Developed in Chapter 13, Exhibit II, Sheet 11.
(7) Developed in Chapter 13, Exhibit II, Sheet 4.
(8) = [(3) x 1000 / (7)].
(9) = [(4) x 1000 / (7)].
(10) = [(5) x 1000 / (7)].
(11) = [(6) x 1000 / (7)].
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_3 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
361

=== PDF PAGE 368 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit IV
DC Insurer Sheet 1
Reported Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months)
Year 3   6   9   12   15   18   21   24   27   30   33   36   
1997  861  1,668  2,459  3,255  3,366  3,385  3,385  3,374  3,372  3,374  3,376  3,376
1998  878  1,493  2,248  2,756  2,826  2,812  2,805  2,804  2,785  2,787  2,787  2,788
1999  463  786  1,166  1,605  1,673  1,642  1,646  1,645  1,649  1,649  1,649  1,649
2000  511  806  1,112  1,530  1,684  1,689  1,686  1,688  1,686  1,687  1,687  1,687
2001  414  750  1,264  1,836  2,088  2,078  2,081  2,086  2,086  2,087  2,087  2,088
2002  502  961  1,424  2,016  2,307  2,330  2,342  2,348  2,352  2,354  2,355  2,355
2003  614  1,231  1,940  2,576  2,878  2,936  2,977  2,988  2,992  2,992  2,994  2,994
2004  833  1,576  2,181  3,048  3,407  3,406  3,397  3,403  3,407  3,410  3,412  3,412
2005  675  1,248  1,833  2,601  2,792  2,791  2,803  2,810  2,813  2,814  2,814  2,814
2006  764  1,374  2,157  2,531  2,897  2,930  2,945  2,949
2007  754  1,468  1,987  2,463
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 3 - 6 6 - 9 9 - 12 12 - 15 15 - 18 18 - 21 21 - 24 24 - 27 27 - 30 30 - 33 33 - 36 To Ult
1997 1.936 1.475 1.324 1.034 1.006 1.000 0.997 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000
1998 1.700 1.506 1.226 1.025 0.995 0.997 1.000 0.993 1.001 1.000 1.000
1999 1.697 1.483 1.377 1.043 0.981 1.002 1.000 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
2000 1.575 1.380 1.376 1.101 1.003 0.998 1.001 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.813 1.685 1.452 1.137 0.995 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2002 1.913 1.482 1.416 1.144 1.010 1.005 1.002 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000
2003 2.005 1.576 1.328 1.117 1.020 1.014 1.004 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
2004 1.892 1.384 1.397 1.118 0.999 0.998 1.002 1.001 1.001 1.001 1.000
2005 1.848 1.468 1.420 1.073 1.000 1.004 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
2006 1.798 1.569 1.174 1.145 1.011 1.005 1.001
2007 1.947 1.354 1.240
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
3 - 6 6 - 9 9 - 12 12 - 15 15 - 18 18 - 21 21 - 24 24 - 27 27 - 30 30 - 33 33 - 36 To Ult
Simple Average
All Years 1.830 1.487 1.339 1.094 1.002 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 7 1.888 1.503 1.347 1.119 1.006 1.004 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 5 1.898 1.470 1.312 1.119 1.008 1.005 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.883 1.496 1.360 1.124 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
All Years 1.838 1.480 1.326 1.091 1.003 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.000
  Latest 7 1.889 1.485 1.335 1.119 1.006 1.004 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 5 1.895 1.464 1.309 1.118 1.008 1.005 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
3 - 6 6 - 9 9 - 12 12 - 15 15 - 18 18 - 21 21 - 24 24 - 27 27 - 30 30 - 33 33 - 36 To Ult
Selected 1.895 1.464 1.309 1.118 1.008 1.005 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 4.125 2.177 1.487 1.136 1.016 1.008 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 24.2% 45.9% 67.2% 88.0% 98.4% 99.2% 99.7% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_4_1 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
362

=== PDF PAGE 369 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit IV
DC Insurer Sheet 2
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported Claims ($000)
Age of Reported Projected
Accident Accident Year Claims CDF Ultimate
Year at 12/31/07 at 12/31/07 to Ultimate Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1997 132  3,376 1.000  3,376
1998 120  2,788 1.000  2,788
1999 108  1,649 1.000  1,649
2000 96  1,687 1.000  1,687
2001 84  2,088 1.000  2,088
2002 72  2,355 1.000  2,355
2003 60  2,994 1.000  2,994
2004 48  3,412 1.000  3,412
2005 36  2,814 1.000  2,814
2006 24  2,949 1.001  2,952
2007 12  2,463 1.136  2,798
Total  28,577  28,915
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2007.
(3) Based on data from DC Insurer.
(4) Based on selected CDF in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_4_2 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
363

=== PDF PAGE 370 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit IV
DC Insurer Sheet 3
Annual Monitoring Test ($000)
Selected Claims Reported Between
Accident Ultimate Expected % Reported at Reported Claims at 12/31/07 and 12/31/08
Year Claims 12/31/07 12/31/08  12/31/07 12/31/08 Actual Expected Difference
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1997 3,376          100.0% 100.0% 3,376          3,376          0 0 0
1998 2,788          100.0% 100.0% 2,788          2,788          0 0 0
1999 1,649          100.0% 100.0% 1,649          1,649          0 0 0
2000 1,687          100.0% 100.0% 1,687          1,687          0 0 0
2001 2,088          100.0% 100.0% 2,088          2,096           8 0  8
2002 2,355          100.0% 100.0% 2,355          2,340          - 15 0 - 15
2003 2,994          100.0% 100.0% 2,994          3,007           13 0  13
2004 3,412          100.0% 100.0% 3,412          3,392          - 20 0 - 20
2005 2,814          100.0% 100.0% 2,814           2,885  71 0  71
2006 2,952          99.9% 100.0% 2,949           3,030  81  3  78
2007 2,798          88.0% 99.9% 2,463           2,733  270  332 - 62
Total  28,915  28,577  28,984  407  335  72
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 2.
(3) and (4) Based on selected CDF in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(5) and (6) Based on data from DC Insurer.
(7) = [(6) - (5)].
(8) = {[(2) - (5)] / [1.0 - (3)] x [(4) - (3)]}.
(9) = [(7) - (8)].
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_4_3 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
364

=== PDF PAGE 371 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit IV
DC Insurer Sheet 4
Monthly Monitoring Test ($000)
Selected Claims Reported Between Claims Reported Between
Accident Ultimate Expected % Reported at Actual Reported Claims at 12/31/07 and 01/31/08 01/31/08 and 02/29/08
Year Claims 12/31/07 01/31/08 02/29/08  12/31/07 01/31/08 02/29/08 Actual Expected Difference Actual Expected Difference
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
1997  3,376 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  3,376  3,376  3,376 0 0 0 0 0 0
1998  2,788 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  2,788  2,788  2,788 0 0 0 0 0 0
1999  1,649 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  1,649  1,649  1,649 0 0 0 0 0 0
2000  1,687 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  1,687  1,687  1,687 0 0 0 0 0 0
2001  2,088 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  2,088  2,096  2,096  8 0  8 0 0 0
2002  2,355 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  2,355  2,355  2,355 0 0 0 0 0 0
2003  2,994 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  2,994  2,994  2,998 0 0 0  4 0  4
2004  3,412 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  3,412  3,422  3,422  10 0  10 0 0 0
2005  2,814 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%  2,814  2,825  2,832  10 0  10  7 0  7
2006  2,952 99.9% 99.9% 100.0%  2,949  2,951  2,986  2  1  1  35  1  34
2007  2,798 88.0% 91.5% 95.0%  2,463  2,473  2,538  10  97 - 87  64  97 - 32
Total  28,915  28,577  28,618  28,728  41  98 - 57  110  98  12
Column Notes:
(2) Developed in Exhibit IV, Sheet 2.
(3) Based on selected CDF in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(4) and (5) Based on linear interpolation of selected CDF in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(6) through (8) Based on data from DC Insurer.
(9) = [(7) - (6)].
(10) = {[(2) - (6)] / [1.0 - (3)] x [(4) - (3)]}.
(11) = [(9) - (10)].
(12) = [(8) - (7)].
(13) = {[(2) - (6)] / [1.0 - (3)] x [(5) - (4)]}.
(14) = [(12) - (13)].
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_4_4 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
365

=== PDF PAGE 372 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit V
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 1
Ratio of Paid Claims to Selected Ultimate Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims as of (months) Selected
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   Ultimate
1998  6,309  8,521  10,082  11,620  13,242  14,419  15,311  15,764  15,822  15,822
1999  4,666  9,861  13,971  18,127  22,032  23,511  24,146  24,592  24,817  25,107
2000  1,302  6,513  12,139  17,828  24,030  28,853  33,222  35,902  36,782  37,246
2001  1,539  5,952  12,319  18,609  24,387  31,090  37,070  38,519  38,798
2002  2,318  7,932  13,822  22,095  31,945  40,629  44,437  48,169
2003  1,743  6,240  12,683  22,892  34,505  39,320  44,373
2004  2,221  9,898  25,950  43,439  52,811  70,780
2005  3,043  12,219  27,073  40,026  74,726
2006  3,531  11,778  22,819  54,968
2007  3,529  11,865  40,300
2008  3,409  33,491
PART 2 - Ratios
Accident Ratio of Paid Claims to Selected Ultimate Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 0.399 0.539 0.637 0.734 0.837 0.911 0.968 0.996 1.000
1999 0.186 0.393 0.556 0.722 0.878 0.936 0.962 0.979 0.988
2000 0.035 0.175 0.326 0.479 0.645 0.775 0.892 0.964 0.988
2001 0.040 0.153 0.318 0.480 0.629 0.801 0.955 0.993
2002 0.048 0.165 0.287 0.459 0.663 0.843 0.923
2003 0.039 0.141 0.286 0.516 0.778 0.886
2004 0.031 0.140 0.367 0.614 0.746
2005 0.041 0.164 0.362 0.536
2006 0.064 0.214 0.415
2007 0.088 0.294
2008 0.102
PART 3 - Average Ratios
Averages
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.065 0.191 0.343 0.521 0.692 0.837 0.909 0.957 0.978 0.992 1.000
  Latest 3 0.085 0.224 0.381 0.555 0.729 0.844 0.923 0.973 0.978 0.992 1.000
  Latest 2 0.095 0.254 0.389 0.575 0.762 0.865 0.939 0.978 0.984 0.992 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.064 0.173 0.339 0.510 0.685 0.824 0.917 0.963 0.979 0.992 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Ratios
Ratios Selection
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
Selected 0.085 0.224 0.381 0.555 0.729 0.844 0.923 0.973 0.978 0.992 1.000
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_5_1 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
366

=== PDF PAGE 373 ===
Chapter 15 - Evaluation of Techniques Exhibit V
XYZ Insurer - Auto BI Sheet 2
Ratio of Reported Claims to Selected Ultimate Claims ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims as of (months) Selected
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   Ultimate
1998  11,171  12,380  13,216  14,067  14,688  16,366  16,163  15,835  15,822  15,822
1999  13,255  16,405  19,639  22,473  23,764  25,094  24,795  25,071  25,107  25,107
2000  15,676  18,749  21,900  27,144  29,488  34,458  36,949  37,505  37,246  37,246
2001  11,827  16,004  21,022  26,578  34,205  37,136  38,541  38,798  38,798
2002  12,811  20,370  26,656  37,667  44,414  48,701  48,169  48,169
2003  9,651  16,995  30,354  40,594  44,231  44,373  44,373
2004  16,995  40,180  58,866  71,707  70,288  70,780
2005  28,674  47,432  70,340  70,655  74,726
2006  27,066  46,783  48,804  54,968
2007  19,477  31,732  40,300
2008  18,632  33,491
PART 2 - Ratios
Accident Ratio of Reported Claims to Selected Ultimate Claims as of (months)
Yea
r 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 0.706 0.782 0.835 0.889 0.928 1.034 1.022 1.001 1.000
1999 0.528 0.653 0.782 0.895 0.947 0.999 0.988 0.999 1.000
2000 0.421 0.503 0.588 0.729 0.792 0.925 0.992 1.007 1.000
2001 0.305 0.412 0.542 0.685 0.882 0.957 0.993 1.000
2002 0.266 0.423 0.553 0.782 0.922 1.011 1.000
2003 0.217 0.383 0.684 0.915 0.997 1.000
2004 0.240 0.568 0.832 1.013 0.993
2005 0.384 0.635 0.941 0.946
2006 0.492 0.851 0.888
2007 0.483 0.787
2008 0.556
PART 3 - Average Ratios
Averages
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.431 0.645 0.780 0.868 0.917 0.968 0.983 1.007 1.007 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 0.511 0.758 0.887 0.958 0.971 0.989 0.995 0.998 1.007 1.000 1.000
  Latest 2 0.520 0.819 0.915 0.979 0.995 1.006 0.997 1.003 0.999 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.453 0.663 0.801 0.881 0.932 0.957 0.995 1.003 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Ratios
Ratios Selection
12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
Selected 0.511 0.758 0.887 0.958 0.971 0.989 0.995 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000
evaluation exhibits.xls 15_5_2 22/07/2009 - 10:04 AM
367

=== PDF PAGE 374 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
PART 4 – ESTIMATING UNPAID CLAIM ADJUSTMENT 
EXPENSES 
 
 
Introduction to Part 4 – Estimating Unpaid Claim Adjustment Expenses ............................  369 
 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claims Adjustment Expenses ...........................  370 
  
Chapter 17 – Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses .........................  386 
 
 
368

=== PDF PAGE 375 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO PART 4 – ESTIMATING UNPAID CLAIM 
ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES 
 
 
In prior chapters of this book, we discuss the categorization of claim adjustment expenses into 
allocated loss adjustment expenses (ALAE) and unallocated loss adjustment expenses (ULAE). 
ALAE correspond to those costs the insurer can assign to a particular claim, such as legal and 
expert witness expenses – thus, the name allocated loss adjustment expense. ULAE, on the other 
hand, cannot be allocated to a specific claim. Examples of ULAE include salaries, rent, and 
computer expenses for the claims department of an insurer.  
 
Actuaries in Canada still separate LAE into ALAE and ULAE (also known as internal loss 
adjusting expense, or ILAE, in Canada). However, the NAIC promulgated two new 
categorizations of claim adjustment expenses (effective January 1, 1998) for U.S. insurers 
reporting on Schedule P of the P&C statutory Annual Statement: defense and cost containment 
(DCC) and adjusting and other (A&O). Generally, DCC expenses include all defense litigation 
and medical cost containment expenses regardless of whether internal or external to the insurer; 
A&O expenses include all claims adjusting expenses, whether internal or external to the insurer. 
 
Some insurers in the U.S. now separately analyze DCC and A&O. Other U.S. insurers continue to 
use the ALAE and ULAE categorization for the purpose of determining unpaid claims adjustment 
expenses; these insurers use other allocation methods to distinguish between DCC and A&O for 
statutory financial statement reporting purposes. In Chapter 16, we address common techniques 
for estimating unpaid ALAE. While we choose to use the term ALAE in this chapter, we point 
out that the development methods presented in Chapter 16 can also be used for DCC. Key 
determining factors include:  
 
 Whether or not sufficient detail is available regarding the expenses such that the data can be 
organized by accident year (policy, underwriting, or report year) 
 
 Whether the expenses tend to track accident year (policy, underwriting, or report year) or are 
more dependent on calendar year  
 
Unlike ALAE, which often demonstrate a close relationship with claims experience, ULAE or 
A&O are often related to the size of the insurer’s claims department and are less closely related to 
claims. In Chapter 17, we present techniques for estimating unpaid ULAE (and A&O). 
 
369

=== PDF PAGE 376 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
CHAPTER 16 – ESTIMATING UNPAID ALLOCATED CLAIM 
ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES 
 
 
After describing the 1998 changes to the categorization of expenses from ALAE and ULAE to 
DCC and A&O, Mr. Wiser states: 
 
The key in grouping expenses for reserving purposes is still whether or not the 
expenses are assigned to an individual claim. Significantly more analysis can be 
completed for those expenses that are assigned to an individual claim (allocated 
expenses) because more data exists. For instance, the accident date of the claim 
that generated the expense is known for an allocated expense, but unknown for 
an unallocated expense.
88  
 
All of the development techniques described in Part 3 can be used with ALAE. The greatest 
challenge for the actuary is often obtaining data for ALAE separate from claim only data. In order 
for the actuary to determine how to estimate unpaid ALAE, he or she must understand how the 
insurer processes such expenses and what data is available for analysis. 
 
Many insurers record only ALAE payments and do not separately estimate case outstanding for 
ALAE. Other insurers may combine data for all types of ALAE. Some insurers maintain detailed 
information regarding case outstanding estimates and payments for the different types of ALAE 
(e.g., defense costs, expert witness fees, claims adjusting, and investigation). Mr. Wiser 
comments on the value of splitting the analysis of ALAE by subcategory: 
 
The most important subcategory is attorneys’ fees and court costs. It will often be 
conducive to obtaining better estimates of loss adjustment expense to develop 
legal expense separate from all other allocated expense items. 
 
Due to data limitations, actuaries often combine ALAE with claims data for the purpose of 
determining estimates of unpaid ALAE. However, it is important that the actuary recognizes that 
for some lines of business the development patterns for ALAE differ significantly from the 
patterns inherent in the claim only experience. For example, for some third-party liability lines of 
insurance, defense and expert witness costs may occur on an ongoing basis during the period of 
investigation and well before any claim payment to the claimant. Furthermore, some defense and 
settlement costs may lag the payment to the injured party. Thus, combining claim amount with 
ALAE for such lines of business can present challenges similar to combining two lines of 
business with non-homogeneous experience.  
 
In Chapter 3 – Understanding the Types of Data Used in the Estimation of Unpaid Claims, we 
state: “We cannot emphasize strongly enough how critical it is for the actuary to fully understand 
the types of data generated by the insurer’s information systems.” This comment is equally 
applicable for the actuary gathering data for an analysis of unpaid ALAE. The actuary must 
understand the definition of ALAE used by the insurer and ensure that such definition has not 
changed over the experience period. The actuary must also understand how changes in the 
insurer’s operations and/or policies may have affected the historical ALAE experience.  
 
 
                                                 
88 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001. 
370

=== PDF PAGE 377 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Example – Auto Property Damage Insurer 
 
The development technique is frequently used by actuaries with paid ALAE. When separate case 
outstanding for ALAE exists, actuaries will also use a reported ALAE development technique.  
Another frequently used approach is the development of the ratio of paid ALAE-to-paid claims 
only. We use a sample insurer writing automobile property damage insurance (Auto Property 
Damage Insurer) to demonstrate four projection techniques for ALAE. We understand based on 
our discussions with the claims department management that Auto Property Damage Insurer 
maintains separate case outstanding for ALAE.  
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 1 through 3, we present the ALAE development method for reported and paid 
ALAE; in Exhibit I, Sheets 4 through 8, we use the development method applied to the ratio of 
paid ALAE-to-paid claims. We present our final projection of ultimate ALAE in Exhibit I, Sheets 
9 and 10. In this approach, we also review the ratio of paid ALAE-to-paid claims. However, we 
use additive development factors instead of multiplicative factors to project ultimate ALAE. In 
“Loss Reserving,” Mr. Wiser notes: “If the ratios are very small at early maturities, the additive 
approach seems to be more stable.”
89 It is important to remember that all of the assumptions 
underlying the development technique described in Chapter 7 are equally applicable to the 
following example for ALAE. 
 
We begin our example with the projection of reported and paid ALAE in Exhibit I, Sheets 1  
and 2, respectively. We immediately notice an increasing volume of reported and paid ALAE for 
accident years 2006 through 2008. After a quick review of the age-to-age factors (looking down 
the columns) for the reported ALAE, we also observe a changing pattern of development 
particularly at 12-to-24 months and 24-to-36 months. The age-to-age factors are smaller for the 
more recent accident year when compared to the earliest accident years in the experience period. 
Both of these observations should lead us to seek further information. Is ALAE increasing 
because the size of the portfolio is increasing (i.e., are there more insureds for recent years than 
prior years)? Were there operational or policy changes over the experience period that have led to 
earlier recognition of ALAE case outstanding? The same magnitude of change is not evident 
when looking down the columns of the age-to-age factors for paid ALAE. 
 
To reflect the most recent experience, we select age-to-age factors based on the volume-weighted 
average for the latest three years for both reported ALAE and paid ALAE. We select a tail factor 
of 1.00 for reported ALAE since there is no further development beyond 96 months evident in the 
triangle. For paid ALAE, we select a tail factor of 1.005 based on a review of the ratios of 
reported ALAE-to-paid ALAE from 96 months to 132 months and consideration of the observed 
paid development during this period. In Exhibit I, Sheet 3, we project ultimate ALAE using the 
development technique described previously in this book. The format of Exhibit I, Sheet 3 is 
identical to the development projection exhibits of many other chapters. The reported and paid 
ALAE projections are very similar; we do see a significant increase in the ultimate ALAE for 
accident years 2006 through 2008. 
 
Our second approach for the projection of ultimate ALAE is in Exhibit I, Sheets 4 through 8. This 
approach uses the development technique applied to the ratio of paid ALAE-to-paid claims only. 
When using a ratio approach for ALAE, the first step is to determine an estimate of the ultimate 
claims. In Exhibit I, Sheets 4 and 5, we project ultimate claims for Auto Property Damage Insurer 
based on reported claims only and paid claims only, respectively. While there is some evidence of 
an increasing volume of claims, it does not appear as significant as the increase in ALAE 
                                                 
89 Foundations of Casualty Actuarial Science, 2001. 
371

=== PDF PAGE 378 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
mentioned earlier. We notice age-to-age factors of less than 1.00 (also known as downward or 
negative development) for reported claims only. This is not surprising to us since we know, based 
on meetings with claims department management, that Auto Property Damage Insurer does not 
consider salvage and subrogation (S&S) when setting case outstanding even though substantial 
recoveries due to S&S are quite common for this line of business. 
 
It is interesting at this time to compare the development patterns for ALAE and claims only. In 
the following two tables we summarize the selected development patterns and the implied 
reporting and payment patterns for Auto Property Damage Insurer. 
 
 Reported ALAE Reported Claims Only 
Age 
(Months) 
 
CDF 
Implied % 
Reported 
 
CDF 
Implied % 
Reported 
12 1.367 73.2% 1.101 90.8% 
24 1.169 85.5% 0.990 101.0% 
36 1.106 90.4% 0.989 101.1% 
48 1.066 93.8% 0.991 100.9% 
60 1.045 95.7% 0.993 100.7% 
72 1.008 99.2% 0.998 100.2% 
84 1.002 99.8% 0.999 100.1% 
96 1.000 100.0% 0.999 100.1% 
108   1.000 100.0% 
 
 
 Paid ALAE Paid Claims Only 
Age 
(Months) 
 
CDF 
Implied % 
Paid 
 
CDF 
Implied % 
Paid 
12 2.138 46.8% 1.584 63.1% 
24 1.241 80.6% 1.029 97.2% 
36 1.155 86.6% 1.007 99.3% 
48 1.096 91.2% 1.004 99.6% 
60 1.058 94.5% 1.002 99.8% 
72 1.028 97.3% 1.001 99.9% 
84 1.013 98.7% 1.001 99.9% 
96 1.009 99.1% 1.001 99.9% 
108 1.007 99.3% 1.000 100.0% 
120 1.005 99.5%   
132 1.005 99.5%   
 
We see that the ALAE reported and paid patterns lag the claims only patterns. One potential 
explanation for this could be related to the S&S and the expenses incurred in achieving these 
recoveries.  
 
We continue to rely on the three-year volume-weighted averages to reflect the most recent 
experience for Auto Property Damage Insurer. In Exhibit I, Sheet 6, we select ultimate claims 
only based on the average of the reported and paid claims only projections. It is not surprising 
that the reported and paid claims only projections are very similar for this relatively stable, short-
tail line of insurance.  
 
372

=== PDF PAGE 379 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheet 7, we use the development technique to analyze the ratio of paid ALAE-to-
paid claims only. An important assumption underlying the ratio analysis is that the relationship 
between ALAE and claims only is relatively stable over the experience period. The actuary 
should confirm this assumption during his or her data gathering process and specifically during 
discussions with management. A change in defense strategy or a new policy with respect to the 
use of external versus internal defense counsel are two examples of changes that could result in 
difficulties in using historical relationships to project future ALAE experience. 
 
While an advantage of the ratio method is that it recognizes the relationship between ALAE and 
claims only, a disadvantage is that any error in the estimate of ultimate claims only could affect 
the estimate of ultimate ALAE. Another potential challenge with a ratio method exists for some 
lines of business where large amounts of ALAE may be spent on claims that ultimately settle with 
no claim payment. In previous chapters, we discuss the importance of reviewing large claims and 
possibly projecting estimates of unpaid large claims separately. Similar comments apply to the 
analysis of unpaid ALAE with respect to large expenses as for large claims. 
 
An advantage of the ratio approach (noted previously in our discussion of salvage and 
subrogation) is that the ratio development factors tend not to be as highly leveraged as the 
development factors based on paid ALAE dollars. We select age-to-age factors based on the 
simple average of the latest three years. Initially, we select a tail factor of 1.00 for the ratio of 
paid ALAE-to-paid claims based on the absence of development seen at 108-to-120 months. We 
will see that this method produces projected ultimate ALAE that are less than the reported and 
paid ALAE projections; a key reason for this difference is the absence of a tail factor. If we 
review the previous tables, we will note that paid ALAE lagged paid claims only. If these implied 
patterns are, in fact, correct, then there should be a tail factor for the ratio of paid ALAE-to-paid 
claims only.  
 
Another advantage of using a ratio approach is the ability to easily interject actuarial judgment in 
the projection analysis, particularly for the selection of the ultimate ALAE ratio for the most 
recent year(s) in the experience period. In Exhibit I, Sheet 8, we use the development technique to 
project an initial estimate of the ALAE ratio to claim amount of 0.0102 for accident years 2007 
and 2008. However, based on comparison to the immediate preceding years, 0.0102 seems high. 
The higher ratio may be due to a change in procedures for recording ALAE or unusually large 
expenses. The average of the ultimate ALAE ratios for all the years up to 2006 in the experience 
period is .0077, and the average for the latest three years excluding 2007 and 2008 is 0.0071. We 
select an ultimate ALAE ratio for 2007 and 2008 of 0.0077, based on the average for all years. 
We determine ultimate ALAE based on the multiplication of the selected ultimate claims (from 
Exhibit I, Sheet 6) and the ultimate ALAE ratio (from Column (6)). 
 
In Exhibit I, Sheets 9 and 10, we present an alternative to the standard multiplicative development 
method. In our third approach, we use additive rather than multiplicative development factors to 
ultimate. The mechanics of this approach are quite similar to the standard method. We first 
display the ratio of paid ALAE-to-paid claims only. (See Part 1 in the top section of Exhibit I, 
Sheet 9.) In the middle section of this exhibit (Part 2), we develop age-to-age factors based on the 
difference between the ratios at successive ages. For example, the 12-to-24 month factor for 
accident year 1998 is equal to the paid ratio of 0.0081 at 24 months minus the paid ratio of 0.0066 
at 12 months, or .0015. Similarly, the 36-to-48 month factor for accident year 2002 is equal to the 
paid ratio at 48 months of 0.0068 less the paid ratio at 36 months of 0.0063, or 0.0005. In Part 3 
of this exhibit, we calculate average age-to-age factors in the same manner as for the standard 
development technique. To be consistent with the other projections used for Auto Property 
Damage Insurer, we select additive age-to-age factors based on the simple average for the latest 
373

=== PDF PAGE 380 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 16 – Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
three years. The age-to-ultimate factor is then based on cumulative addition (not multiplication) 
beginning with the selected factor for the oldest age.  
 
We present the projection of ultimate ALAE using the additive approach in Exhibit I, Sheet 10. 
The only difference between this projection and the projection in Exhibit I, Sheet 8, which is 
based on the standard (i.e., multiplicative) approach, is that we add the paid ALAE ratio from the 
latest diagonal of the triangle to the cumulative development factor instead of multiplying by the 
cumulative development factor. In Exhibit I, Sheet 9, we do not modify the ALAE ratio for the 
latest years, instead we allow the initial projected ratio values for 2007 and 2008 to be used to 
project ultimate ALAE. 
 
The results of the four projections are summarized in Exhibit I, Sheet 11. In this exhibit, we also 
present the estimated unpaid ALAE, which is equal to projected ultimate ALAE less paid ALAE. 
The estimated unpaid ALAE in this exhibit represent total unpaid ALAE, including both case 
outstanding for ALAE and ALAE IBNR. We observe that without a tail factor, the projected 
ALAE based on the standard development technique applied to the ratio of paid ALAE-to-paid 
claims only appears low. Even if we change the tail factor to 1.005, this method still does not 
appear sufficient. The challenge is in selecting the ultimate ALAE ratio for the most recent two 
accident years. With a selected ratio of 0.0077, the estimate of unpaid ALAE is negative for 
accident year 2007. This intuitively does not seem correct based on our knowledge of the 
property damage line of insurance and the operations of XYZ Insurer. In selecting which method 
is appropriate for each accident year, the actuary will need to conduct similar evaluation analyses 
as described in Chapter 15 for claims. 
 
 
Choosing a Technique for Estimating Unpaid ALAE 
 
Similar comments apply for ALAE as for claims with respect to when the various estimation 
techniques work and when they do not. For many actuaries, the choice of a technique to estimate 
unpaid ALAE depends primarily on the types of data available, the credibility of the data, and an 
understanding as to how the insurer’s environment affects the various projection techniques. 
374

=== PDF PAGE 381 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 1
Reported ALAE ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported ALAE as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  684  953  1,031  1,062  1,080  1,084  1,089  1,092  1,092  1,092  1,092
1999  625  929  1,006  1,033  1,041  1,046  1,049  1,051  1,051  1,051
2000  571  771  821  844  858  861  862  862  862
2001  629  894  943  982  997  1,002  1,003  1,007
2002  618  872  952  1,005  1,033  1,093  1,110
2003  757  948  1,035  1,092  1,095  1,143
2004  743  915  976  1,001  1,032
2005  789  948  1,001  1,032
2006  988  1,140  1,198
2007  1,373  1,596
2008  1,556
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.393 1.082 1.030 1.017 1.004 1.005 1.003 1.000 1.000 1.000
1999 1.486 1.083 1.027 1.008 1.005 1.003 1.002 1.000 1.000
2000 1.350 1.065 1.028 1.017 1.003 1.001 1.000 1.000
2001 1.421 1.055 1.041 1.015 1.005 1.001 1.004
2002 1.411 1.092 1.056 1.028 1.058 1.016
2003 1.252 1.092 1.055 1.003 1.044
2004 1.231 1.067 1.026 1.031
2005 1.202 1.056 1.031
2006 1.154 1.051
2007 1.162
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.200 1.071 1.042 1.019 1.023 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.173 1.058 1.037 1.021 1.036 1.006 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.198 1.071 1.042 1.020 1.018 1.003 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.193 1.070 1.042 1.018 1.024 1.005 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.170 1.057 1.038 1.020 1.036 1.006 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.170 1.057 1.038 1.020 1.036 1.006 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.367 1.169 1.106 1.066 1.045 1.008 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 73.2% 85.5% 90.4% 93.8% 95.7% 99.2% 99.8% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_1 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
375

=== PDF PAGE 382 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 2
Paid ALAE ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid ALAE as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  512  856  949  1,003  1,049  1,065  1,075  1,080  1,082  1,084  1,084
1999  529  874  952  988  1,016  1,024  1,034  1,040  1,042  1,045
2000  471  720  787  821  846  855  857  860  861
2001  480  802  882  936  975  987  995  998
2002  451  793  887  956  1,004  1,067  1,098
2003  572  874  974  1,041  1,069  1,085
2004  557  840  921  960  989
2005  563  882  941  987
2006  636  1,064  1,132
2007  774  1,454
2008  952
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.672 1.109 1.057 1.046 1.015 1.009 1.005 1.002 1.002 1.000
1999 1.652 1.089 1.038 1.028 1.008 1.010 1.006 1.002 1.003
2000 1.529 1.093 1.043 1.030 1.011 1.002 1.004 1.001
2001 1.671 1.100 1.061 1.042 1.012 1.008 1.003
2002 1.758 1.119 1.078 1.050 1.063 1.029
2003 1.528 1.114 1.069 1.027 1.015
2004 1.508 1.096 1.042 1.030
2005 1.567 1.067 1.049
2006 1.673 1.064
2007 1.879
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.631 1.092 1.060 1.036 1.022 1.012 1.004 1.002 1.002 1.000
  Latest 3 1.706 1.076 1.053 1.036 1.030 1.013 1.004 1.002 1.002 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.589 1.093 1.060 1.034 1.013 1.009 1.004 1.002 1.002 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.649 1.090 1.060 1.036 1.022 1.012 1.004 1.002 1.002 1.000
  Latest 3 1.723 1.075 1.054 1.036 1.030 1.014 1.004 1.002 1.002 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.723 1.075 1.054 1.036 1.030 1.014 1.004 1.002 1.002 1.000 1.005
CDF to Ultimate 2.138 1.241 1.155 1.096 1.058 1.028 1.013 1.009 1.007 1.005 1.005
Percent Received 46.8% 80.6% 86.6% 91.2% 94.5% 97.3% 98.7% 99.1% 99.3% 99.5% 99.5%
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_2 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
376

=== PDF PAGE 383 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 3
Projection of Ultimate ALAE ($000)
Age of Projected Ultimate ALAE
Accident Accident Year ALAE at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 132  1,092  1,084 1.000 1.005  1,092  1,089
1999 120  1,051  1,045 1.000 1.005  1,051  1,050
2000 108  862  861 1.000 1.007  862  867
2001 96  1,007  998 1.000 1.009  1,007  1,007
2002 84  1,110  1,098 1.002 1.013  1,112  1,112
2003 72  1,143  1,085 1.008 1.028  1,152  1,115
2004 60  1,032  989 1.045 1.058  1,078  1,046
2005 48  1,032  987 1.066 1.096  1,100  1,082
2006 36  1,198  1,132 1.106 1.155  1,325  1,307
2007 24  1,596  1,454 1.169 1.241  1,866  1,804
2008 12  1,556  952 1.367 2.138  2,127  2,035
Total  12,679  11,685  13,773  13,517
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from Auto Property Damage Insurer.
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 1 and 2.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_3 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
377

=== PDF PAGE 384 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 4
Reported Claims Only ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Reported Claims Only as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  109,286  111,832  110,648  109,174  108,849  108,779  108,786  108,646  108,736  108,735  108,732
1999  120,639  119,607  116,924  116,482  116,332  116,230  116,236  116,161  116,160  116,125
2000  115,422  119,143  118,641  117,008  116,782  116,919  116,860  116,825  116,472
2001  129,430  139,925  138,161  137,395  137,269  137,033  136,998  137,056
2002  134,190  143,852  143,093  142,360  142,004  141,715  141,627
2003  152,678  166,131  166,015  165,579  165,229  163,508
2004  144,595  154,830  154,295  154,228  153,750
2005  137,791  154,230  154,307  153,981
2006  159,818  178,399  179,384
2007  162,205  178,425
2008  176,030
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.023 0.989 0.987 0.997 0.999 1.000 0.999 1.001 1.000 1.000
1999 0.991 0.978 0.996 0.999 0.999 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000
2000 1.032 0.996 0.986 0.998 1.001 0.999 1.000 0.997
2001 1.081 0.987 0.994 0.999 0.998 1.000 1.000
2002 1.072 0.995 0.995 0.997 0.998 0.999
2003 1.088 0.999 0.997 0.998 0.990
2004 1.071 0.997 1.000 0.997
2005 1.119 1.001 0.998
2006 1.116 1.006
2007 1.100
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.099 0.999 0.997 0.998 0.997 1.000 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.112 1.001 0.998 0.997 0.995 1.000 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.101 0.999 0.997 0.998 0.998 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.099 1.000 0.997 0.998 0.997 1.000 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.111 1.001 0.998 0.997 0.995 1.000 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.111 1.001 0.998 0.997 0.995 1.000 1.000 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.101 0.990 0.989 0.991 0.993 0.998 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Reported 90.8% 101.0% 101.1% 100.9% 100.7% 100.2% 100.1% 100.1% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_4 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
378

=== PDF PAGE 385 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 5
Paid Claims Only ($000)
PART 1 - Data Triangle
Accident Paid Claims Only as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998  78,144  105,902  107,306  108,135  108,307  108,494  108,523  108,628  108,731  108,730  108,730
1999  81,290  114,037  115,347  115,696  115,843  115,930  115,962  115,969  115,969  116,033
2000  83,563  114,175  116,044  116,458  116,620  116,857  116,810  116,807  116,807
2001  91,475  133,761  136,143  136,552  136,818  136,838  136,960  136,995
2002  92,349  138,461  140,904  141,323  141,380  141,452  141,461
2003  111,655  158,092  161,823  162,556  162,802  163,257
2004  106,032  149,157  151,729  152,229  152,613
2005  98,270  149,504  152,895  153,154
2006  107,137  171,332  175,602
2007  114,337  171,505
2008  124,470
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.355 1.013 1.008 1.002 1.002 1.000 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000
1999 1.403 1.011 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.001
2000 1.366 1.016 1.004 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.000 1.000
2001 1.462 1.018 1.003 1.002 1.000 1.001 1.000
2002 1.499 1.018 1.003 1.000 1.001 1.000
2003 1.416 1.024 1.005 1.002 1.003
2004 1.407 1.017 1.003 1.003
2005 1.521 1.023 1.002
2006 1.599 1.025
2007 1.500
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.489 1.021 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.540 1.022 1.003 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.479 1.021 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
Volume-weighted Average
  Latest 5 1.488 1.021 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
  Latest 3 1.540 1.022 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.540 1.022 1.003 1.002 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.584 1.029 1.007 1.004 1.002 1.001 1.001 1.001 1.000 1.000 1.000
Percent Paid 63.1% 97.2% 99.3% 99.6% 99.8% 99.9% 99.9% 99.9% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_5 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
379

=== PDF PAGE 386 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 6
Projection of Ultimate Claims Using Reported and Paid Claims Only ($000)
Age of Proj. Ultimate Claims Only Selected
Accident Accident Year Claims Only at 12/31/08 CDF to Ultimate Using Dev. Method with Ultimate
Year at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Reported Paid Reported Paid Claims Only
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
1998 132  108,732  108,730 1.000 1.000  108,732  108,730  108,731
1999 120  116,125  116,033 1.000 1.000  116,125  116,033  116,079
2000 108  116,472  116,807 1.000 1.000  116,472  116,807  116,639
2001 96  137,056  136,995 0.999 1.001  136,919  137,132  137,026
2002 84  141,627  141,461 0.999 1.001  141,485  141,602  141,544
2003 72  163,508  163,257 0.998 1.001  163,181  163,420  163,301
2004 60  153,750  152,613 0.993 1.002  152,674  152,918  152,796
2005 48  153,981  153,154 0.991 1.004  152,596  153,766  153,181
2006 36  179,384  175,602 0.989 1.007  177,410  176,831  177,121
2007 24  178,425  171,505 0.990 1.029  176,641  176,479  176,560
2008 12  176,030  124,470 1.101 1.584  193,809  197,161  195,485
Total  1,625,091  1,560,626  1,636,045  1,640,879  1,638,462
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) and (4) Based on data from Auto Property Damage Insurer
(5) and (6) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheets 4 and 5.
(7) = [(3) x (5)].
(8) = [(4) x (6)].
(9) = [Average of (7) and (8)].
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_6 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
380

=== PDF PAGE 387 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 7
Ratio of Paid ALAE to Paid Claims Only
PART 1 - Ratio Triangle
Accident Ratio of Paid ALAE to Paid Claims Only as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 0.0066        0.0081        0.0088        0.0093        0.0097        0.0098        0.0099        0.0099        0.0100        0.0100        0.0100        
1999 0.0065        0.0077        0.0083        0.0085        0.0088        0.0088        0.0089        0.0090        0.0090        0.0090        
2000 0.0056        0.0063        0.0068        0.0070        0.0073        0.0073        0.0073        0.0074        0.0074        
2001 0.0052        0.0060        0.0065        0.0069        0.0071        0.0072        0.0073        0.0073        
2002 0.0049        0.0057        0.0063        0.0068        0.0071        0.0075        0.0078        
2003 0.0051        0.0055        0.0060        0.0064        0.0066        0.0066        
2004 0.0053        0.0056        0.0061        0.0063        0.0065        
2005 0.0057        0.0059        0.0062        0.0064        
2006 0.0059        0.0062        0.0064        
2007 0.0068        0.0085        
2008 0.0076        
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 1.234 1.094 1.049 1.044 1.014 1.009 1.004 1.001 1.002 1.000
1999 1.178 1.077 1.035 1.027 1.007 1.009 1.006 1.002 1.002
2000 1.119 1.075 1.039 1.029 1.009 1.003 1.004 1.001
2001 1.143 1.081 1.058 1.040 1.012 1.007 1.003
2002 1.173 1.099 1.075 1.050 1.062 1.029
2003 1.079 1.089 1.064 1.025 1.012
2004 1.072 1.078 1.039 1.028
2005 1.030 1.043 1.047
2006 1.046 1.038
2007 1.252
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 1.096 1.069 1.057 1.034 1.020 1.012 1.004 1.001 1.002 1.000
  Latest 3 1.109 1.053 1.050 1.034 1.029 1.013 1.004 1.001 1.002 1.000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 1.066 1.070 1.056 1.032 1.011 1.009 1.004 1.001 1.002 1.000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 1.109 1.053 1.050 1.034 1.029 1.013 1.004 1.001 1.002 1.000 1.000
CDF to Ultimate 1.332 1.201 1.140 1.086 1.050 1.021 1.007 1.003 1.002 1.000 1.000
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_7 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
381

=== PDF PAGE 388 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 8
Projection of Ultimate ALAE ($000)
Ratio of
Age of Paid ALAE to Projected Selected Ultimate Projected
Accident Accident Yea r Paid Claims Only CDF Ultimate Paid-to-Paid Ultimate
Year at 12/31/08 at 12/31/08 to Ultimate Ratio Ratio Claims Only Paid ALAE
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 132 0.0100 1.000 0.0100        0.0100          108,731        1,084          
1999 120 0.0090 1.000 0.0090        0.0090          116,079        1,045          
2000 108 0.0074 1.002 0.0074        0.0074          116,639        861             
2001 96 0.0073 1.003 0.0073        0.0073          137,026        1,001          
2002 84 0.0078 1.007 0.0078        0.0078          141,544        1,106          
2003 72 0.0066 1.021 0.0068        0.0068          163,301        1,108          
2004 60 0.0065 1.050 0.0068        0.0068          152,796        1,040          
2005 48 0.0064 1.086 0.0070        0.0070          153,181        1,072          
2006 36 0.0064 1.140 0.0073        0.0073          177,121        1,302          
2007 24 0.0085 1.201 0.0102        0.0077          176,560        1,360          
2008 12 0.0076 1.332 0.0102        0.0077          195,485        1,505          
Total 1,638,462     12,485        
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) From latest diagonal of triangle in Exhibit I, Sheet 7.
(4) Based on CDF from Exhibit I, Sheet 7.
(5) = [(3) x (4)].
(6) = (5), except for 2007 and 2008 which are judgementally selected based on review of prior years.
(7) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 6.
(8) = [(6) x (7)].
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_8 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
382

=== PDF PAGE 389 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 9
Ratio of Paid ALAE to Paid Claims Only - Additive Method
PART 1 - Ratio Triangle
Accident Ratio of Paid ALAE to Paid Claims Only as of (months)
Year 12   24   36   48   60   72   84   96   108   120   132   
1998 0.0066        0.0081        0.0088        0.0093        0.0097        0.0098        0.0099        0.0099        0.0100        0.0100        0.0100        
1999 0.0065        0.0077        0.0083        0.0085        0.0088        0.0088        0.0089        0.0090        0.0090        0.0090        
2000 0.0056        0.0063        0.0068        0.0070        0.0073        0.0073        0.0073        0.0074        0.0074        
2001 0.0052        0.0060        0.0065        0.0069        0.0071        0.0072        0.0073        0.0073        
2002 0.0049        0.0057        0.0063        0.0068        0.0071        0.0075        0.0078        
2003 0.0051        0.0055        0.0060        0.0064        0.0066        0.0066        
2004 0.0053        0.0056        0.0061        0.0063        0.0065        
2005 0.0057        0.0059        0.0062        0.0064        
2006 0.0059        0.0062        0.0064        
2007 0.0068        0.0085        
2008 0.0076        
PART 2 - Age-to-Age Factors
Accident Age-to-Age Factors - Additive
Year 12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 109 - 120 To Ult
1998 0.0015 0.0008 0.0004 0.0004 0.0001 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
1999 0.0012 0.0006 0.0003 0.0002 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000
2000 0.0007 0.0005 0.0003 0.0002 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
2001 0.0007 0.0005 0.0004 0.0003 0.0001 0.0001 0.0000
2002 0.0008 0.0006 0.0005 0.0003 0.0004 0.0002
2003 0.0004 0.0005 0.0004 0.0002 0.0001
2004 0.0004 0.0004 0.0002 0.0002
2005 0.0002 0.0003 0.0003
2006 0.0003 0.0002
2007 0.0017
2008
PART 3 - Average Age-to-Age Factors
Averages - Additive
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Simple Average
  Latest 5 0.0006 0.0004 0.0004 0.0002 0.0001 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
  Latest 3 0.0007 0.0003 0.0003 0.0002 0.0002 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
Medial Average
  Latest 5x1 0.0004 0.0004 0.0004 0.0002 0.0001 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
PART 4 - Selected Age-to-Age Factors
Development Factor Selection - Additive
12 - 24 24 - 36 36 - 48 48 - 60 60 - 72 72 - 84 84 - 96 96 - 108 108 - 120 120 - 132 To Ult
Selected 0.0007 0.0003 0.0003 0.0002 0.0002 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
CDF to Ultimate 0.0019 0.0012 0.0009 0.0006 0.0004 0.0002 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_9 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
383

=== PDF PAGE 390 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 10
Projection of Ultimate ALAE ($000) - Additive Method
Ratio of
Age of Paid ALAE to Additive Projected Selected Ultimate Projected
Accident Accident Year Paid Claims Only CDF Ultimate Paid-to-Paid Ultimate
Year at 12/31/08 at 12/31/08 to Ultimate Ratio Ratio Claims Only Paid ALAE
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1998 132 0.0100 0.0000 0.0100      0.0100          108,731        1,084           
1999 120 0.0090 0.0000 0.0090      0.0090          116,079        1,045           
2000 108 0.0074 0.0000 0.0074      0.0074          116,639        862              
2001 96 0.0073 0.0000 0.0073      0.0073          137,026        1,003           
2002 84 0.0078 0.0001 0.0078      0.0078          141,544        1,108           
2003 72 0.0066 0.0002 0.0068      0.0068          163,301        1,112           
2004 60 0.0065 0.0004 0.0068      0.0068          152,796        1,046           
2005 48 0.0064 0.0006 0.0070      0.0070          153,181        1,077           
2006 36 0.0064 0.0009 0.0073      0.0073          177,121        1,300           
2007 24 0.0085 0.0012 0.0097      0.0097          176,560        1,709           
2008 12 0.0076 0.0019 0.0096      0.0096          195,485        1,870           
Total 1,638,462     13,215         
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) From latest diagonal of triangle in Exhibit I, Sheet 9.
(4) Based on additive CDF from Exhibit I, Sheet 9.
(5) = [(3) + (4)].
(6) = (5).
(7) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 6.
(8) = [(6) x (7)].
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_10 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
384

=== PDF PAGE 391 ===
Chapter 16 - Estimating Unpaid Allocated Claim Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
Auto Property Damage Insurer Sheet 11
Development of Estimated Unpaid ALAE ($000)
Age of Paid Projected Ultimate ALAE Estimated Unpaid ALAE
Accident Accident Yea r ALAE Using Dev Method with Using Ratio Method with Using Dev Method with Using Ratio Method with
Year at 12/31/08 at 12/31/08 Reported Paid Mult. Additive Reported Paid Mult. Additive
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
1998 132  1,084  1,092  1,089  1,084  1,084  8  5  0  0
1999 120  1,045  1,051  1,050  1,045  1,045  6  5  0  0
2000 108  861  862  867  861  862  1  6  0  1
2001 96  998  1,007  1,007  1,001  1,003  9  9  3  5
2002 84  1,098  1,112  1,112  1,106  1,108  14  14  8  10
2003 72  1,085  1,152  1,115  1,108  1,112  67  30  23  27
2004 60  989  1,078  1,046  1,040  1,046  89  57  51  57
2005 48  987  1,100  1,082  1,072  1,077  113  95  85  90
2006 36  1,132  1,325  1,307  1,302  1,300  193  175  170  168
2007 24  1,454  1,866  1,804  1,360  1,709  412  350 - 94  255
2008 12  952  2,127  2,035  1,505  1,870  1,175  1,083  553  918
Total  11,685  13,773  13,517  12,485  13,215  2,088  1,832  800  1,530
Column Notes:
(2) Age of accident year in (1) at December 31, 2008.
(3) Based on data from Auto Property Damage Insurer.
(4) and (5) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 3.
(6) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 8.
(7) Developed in Exhibit I, Sheet 10.
(8) = [(4) - (3)].
(9) = [(5) - (3)].
(10) = [(6) - (3)].
(11) = [(7) - (3)].
new ALAE exhibits.xls 16_1_11 04/03/2009 - 3:00 PM
385

=== PDF PAGE 392 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
CHAPTER 17 – ESTIMATING UNPAID UNALLOCATED CLAIM 
ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES 
 
In this chapter, we present several techniques for estimating unpaid unallocated claim adjustment 
expenses (ULAE). We rely extensively on the 2003 paper by Robert F. Conger, FCAS, FCIA, 
MAAA and Alejandra Nolibos, FCAS, MAAA “Estimating ULAE Liabilities: Rediscovering and 
Expanding Kittel’s Approach.” 90  
 
ULAE (known as ILAE in Canada) refer to general overhead expenses associated with the 
claims-handling process, and particularly the costs of investigating, handling, paying, and 
resolving claims. We can differentiate between ALAE and ULAE. As described in Chapter 16, 
ALAE are those costs that can be assigned to a specific claim. Examples of ALAE include legal 
fees, the cost of expert witnesses, police reports, engineering reports, and independent adjusters if 
assigned to a particular claim. In contrast, ULAE are the costs that cannot be assigned to a unique 
claim; ULAE are those costs associated with operating the claims department, including rent, 
technology, salaries, as well as management and administrative expenses. 
 
There are two broad classifications of techniques for estimating unpaid ULAE: dollar-based and 
count based. These techniques, which rely on fundamentally different assumptions, vary 
significantly in the amount of data and calculations required. In practice, the seemingly divergent 
assumptions of the various methods may not affect the resulting unpaid ULAE estimates quite as 
severely as it might seem at first glance. Since the methods are used for an entire population of 
claims, they need to be correct only for the “average” claim being reported, handled, paid, or 
closed during a time period – not for each individual claim. In other cases, the gulf can be bridged 
by stratifying the claims data and types of transactions and making assumptions about the relative 
ULAE resources required in the various strata.   
 
This chapter is organized as follows: 
 
 Dollar-based techniques 
 Count-based techniques 
 Triangle-based techniques 
 Comparison example  
 
Ideally, an actuary estimating unpaid ULAE would have access to sufficient data to employ 
both dollar-based and count-based methods. Given the specific characteristics of the company, 
the actuary would then select the methodology that is likely to produce the best estimate of 
future ULAE.  
 
ULAE liabilities also have a “market value” in the fees that a third-party claims administrator 
(TPA) would require to take over the management of the book of claims. Many self-insurers 
use such market values to determine the unpaid ULAE for financial reporting purposes. 
 
 
                                                 
90 Mr. Conger and Ms. Nolibos granted permission for the use of direct quotes from their paper without the 
standard punctuation for quotation to facilitate the ease of reading of this text. 
386

=== PDF PAGE 393 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Dollar-Based Techniques 
 
A fundamental assumption of dollar-based techniques is that ULAE expenditures track with 
claim91 dollars with regards to both timing and relative amount. Most importantly, this 
assumption means that the general timing of ULAE expenditures (or of specified portions of 
ULAE expenditures) follows the timing of the reporting or payment of claim dollars. In addition, 
this assumption implies that a $1,000 claim requires ten times as much ULAE as a $100 claim.  
In the following sections, we describe four commonly used dollar-based techniques: 
 
 Classical (also known as traditional) 
 Kittel refinement  
 Conger and Nolibos method – generalized Kittel approach 
 Mango-Allen refinement 
 
 
Classical (or Traditional) Technique 
 
In the classical technique, the unpaid ULAE is estimated using a paid ULAE-to-paid claims ratio 
determined by comparing the calendar year paid ULAE to the calendar year paid claims.  
 
 
Key Assumptions of Classical Technique 
 
Key assumptions of the classical technique include: 
 
 The insurer’s ULAE-to-claim relationship has achieved a steady-state so that the ratio of paid 
ULAE-to-paid claims provides a reasonable approximation of the relationship of ultimate 
ULAE-to-ultimate claims. 
 
 The relative volume and cost of future claims management activity on not-yet-reported claims 
and reported-but-not-yet-closed claims will be proportional to the dollars of IBNR and case 
outstanding, respectively.  
 
The classical technique assumes that one-half of ULAE are sustained when opening a claim and 
one-half is sustained when closing the claim. Thus, we apply 50% of the ULAE ratio to case 
outstanding, since, for known claims, one-half of the unallocated work was already completed at 
the time of opening; and we apply 100% of the ULAE ratio to IBNR, since all unallocated work 
remains to be completed (that is, the work associated with opening and closing the claims).  
 
 
Mechanics of Classical Technique 
 
There are four steps in the classical technique for estimating unpaid ULAE: 
 
 Calculate ratios of historical calendar year paid ULAE-to-calendar year paid claims  
 
 Review historical paid ULAE-to-paid claims ratios for trends or patterns 
 
                                                 
91 The terms claim dollars or claims include ALAE but exclude ULAE. 
387

=== PDF PAGE 394 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
 Select a ratio of ULAE-to-claims applicable to future claims payments 
 
 Apply 50% of the selected ULAE ratio to case outstanding and 100% of the selected ULAE 
ratio to IBNR 
 
In Exhibit I, we calculate the ratios of paid ULAE-to-paid claims (including ALAE) for XYZ 
Insurer. In the examples presented for XYZ Insurer in previous chapters, we refer to the 
experience of one particular line of insurance. In estimating unpaid ULAE, we use the experience 
for the insurer as a whole (i.e., all lines of coverage combined). For this example, we are fortunate 
to have five years of complete and accurate data. We are somewhat surprised to observe relatively 
stable ULAE ratios given all the changes we know transpired at XYZ Insurer during the 
experience period. We select a ULAE ratio of 0.045 based on a review of the historical 
experience as well as discussions with company management regarding their expectations for the 
future. These discussions included expectations regarding claims department caseload, the 
relationship between claim and salary inflation, as well as management’s expectations of the 
future use of independent adjusters and TPAs. 
 
For XYZ Insurer, case outstanding at December 31, 2008 is $603 million and selected IBNR is 
$316 million. Using the classical technique, we estimate unpaid ULAE at December 31, 2008 to 
be $27.8 million. As calculated in Exhibit I, Line (9): 
 
 $27.8 million = [(0.045 x 50% x $603 million) + (0.045 x 100% x $316 million)] 
 
 
Challenges of the Classical Technique 
 
Recall that the key assumption underlying the application of 50% of the ULAE ratio to case 
outstanding and 100% of the ULAE ratio to IBNR is that 50% of the expenses are sustained when 
opening the claim and the remaining 50% when closing the claim. One challenge with the 
classical technique is that “closing” a claim and “paying” a claim do not necessarily mean the 
same thing. For some lines of business, a single payment may be the norm, and thus, such 
payment may in fact represent settlement (i.e., closure) of the claim, and therefore the end of the 
claims handling activity. An example is glass coverage to replace a shattered windshield under 
automobile physical damage insurance. (Note, not all automobile physical damage insurance can 
necessarily be categorized as single payment where payment equates to closure of the claim.) An 
example of insurance where a claim payment and closing of the claim often differ is U.S. workers 
compensation; for this coverage, regular payments can replace lost wages for an extended period 
of time.  
 
Some actuaries address this challenge by adjusting the percentages applied to the case 
outstanding and the IBNR to reflect their expectations for the particular company. For example, 
an actuary of an insurer with a portfolio of long-tail professional liability coverage, which is 
characterized by very long-tailed liabilities and substantial claims-handling work during the life 
of the claim, estimates unpaid ULAE assuming ratios of 25% applied to case outstanding and 
75% to IBNR, which includes development on case outstanding. Thus, they assume a greater 
proportion of the expenses are related to closing the claims rather than opening claims. 
 
The definition of IBNR poses another challenge for actuaries using the classical technique. 
Actuaries typically use the broad definition of IBNR, and thus IBNR reserves represent the 
liability for both claims that are not yet reported as well as future case development on known 
claims. As described in Chapter 1, claims that are incurred but not yet reported (IBNYR) are also 
388

=== PDF PAGE 395 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
referred to as pure IBNR or the narrow definition of IBNR; future case development on known 
claims is referred to as incurred but not enough reported (IBNER). Theoretically, in using the 
classical technique, the actuary would apply 100% of the ULAE ratio to IBNYR (pure IBNR) and 
50% of the ULAE ratio to the sum of case reserves and IBNER.  
 
Some actuaries refine the classical technique by estimating pure IBNR as a percentage of total 
IBNR or a percentage of the selected ultimate claims for the latest accident year(s).
92 For 
example, assume that pure IBNR for XYZ Insurer is equal to 5% of the latest accident year’s 
(2008) ultimate claims. Given ultimate claims for accident year 2008 of $380 million, we can 
calculate the unpaid ULAE for XYZ Insurer as follows: 
 
Unpd ULAE = [(ULAE ratio x 50% x unpd known claims) + (ULAE ratio x 100% x Pure IBNR)] 
         = [(0.045 x 50% x (case outstanding + IBNER)) + (0.045 x 100% x IBNYR)] 
 
We calculate IBNYR claims of $19 million based on 5% of accident year 2008 ultimate claims 
(0.05 x $380 million) and derive the IBNER claims as total IBNR less IBNYR or $297 million 
($316 million - $19 million). Following the formula for the classical technique, we calculate that 
the estimated unpaid ULAE for XYZ Insurer is $21.1 million. 
 
Unpd ULAE = [(0.045 x 50% x ($603 million + $297 million)) + (0.045 x 100% x $19 million)] 
 
This estimate of unpaid ULAE is significantly less than the initial estimate of $27.8 million for 
XYZ insurer. (See Exhibit I, Lines (9) and (10).)  
 
The selected pure IBNR percentage relative to the ultimate losses of the latest accident year is 
clearly an important assumption in the above calculation. The indicated unpaid ULAE differ by 
more than $6 million, or 24%, when the pure IBNR refinement is included in the classical 
technique. While actuaries frequently assume 5% of the most recent accident year ultimate claims 
as an approximation to estimate pure IBNR, the actuary should be able to support such an 
approximation based on the experience of the organization. To the extent possible, the actuary 
would test this assumption by calculating the pure IBNR claims and determine the ratio to total 
unpaid claims. One method for testing this assumption is to first estimate the number of IBNR 
claim counts (projected ultimate claim counts minus reported claim counts). The actuary can then 
multiply the number of IBNR counts for each accident year by an ultimate severity value for each 
accident year to determine an estimate of ultimate claims associated with pure IBNR. Such an 
analysis can be performed for each line of business, and the total ultimate claims associated with 
pure IBNR can be compared to total ultimate claims for both IBNR and reported claim counts for 
the latest accident year.  
 
 
                                                 
92 We do not address particular methods for allocating total IBNR between IBNYR and IBNER. However, 
actuaries may rely on report year analysis, frequency-severity techniques, or other approaches to estimate 
the proportion of total IBNR that is pure IBNR. Actuaries often rely on judgment for this allocation when 
estimating unpaid ULAE. 
 
389

=== PDF PAGE 396 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
When the Classical Technique Works and When it Does Not 
 
In the 1989 paper “Determination of Outstanding Liabilities for Unallocated Loss Adjustment 
Expenses,”93 Wendy Johnson states that upon analysis it is apparent that the classical technique 
“will only give good results for very short-tailed, stable lines of business.”  
She continues: 
 
This method came into use at a time when most lines developed in well under 
five years, cost inflation was low and level if it existed at all, most calculations 
were made using only pencil and paper, and claim reporting and payment 
patterns were stable. We no longer live in this kind of environment. Our 
estimation methods should be adapted to fit the current environment and 
grounded firmly in our understanding of the claims process, even for estimation 
of peripheral liabilities like ULAE. 
 
Similar observations are expressed by Kay Kellogg Rahardjo in the 1996 paper “A Methodology 
for Pricing and Reserving for Claim Expenses in Workers Compensation.”
94 She states: 
 
It is no longer acceptable for companies to estimate unallocated loss adjustment 
expenses (ULAE) and, in particular, claim expense reserves by using paid to paid 
ratios. The paid to paid methodology assumes that claims incur expenses only 
when initially opened and when closed. While this may not be an unreasonable 
assumption for claims from short-tailed lines, this is definitely not true for 
liability claims. Moreover, the paid to paid ratio itself is subject to distortion 
when a company is growing or shrinking or when a line of business is in 
“transition”, as was the case for workers compensation throughout the early 
1990s as many large customers moved to deductible policies or towards self-
insurance. 
 
As noted previously, there are challenges associated with the use of the classical technique due to 
the differences between paying and closing claims as well as the use of total IBNR as opposed to 
pure IBNR in the formula. Furthermore, the assumption that 50% of ULAE payments are 
sustained when a claim is opened and the remaining 50% when a claim is closed may not 
accurately describe an insurer’s application of resources to the various stages in the life cycle of 
its claims.  
 
It is also important to recognize that the classical technique can lead to inaccurate results 
whenever the volume of claims is growing. Donald Mango and Craig Allen expand on this point 
in their paper “Two Alternative Methods for Calculating the Unallocated Loss Adjustment 
Expense Reserve.”
95 They note that the numerator in the ratio (i.e., calendar year paid ULAE) 
tends to react relatively quickly to an increase in exposure or an increase in the number of claims 
being reported. However, the denominator (i.e., paid claims) reflects claim payments made on 
claims that were reported at the former, lower, exposure base and will not be as responsive to the 
growth in volume. Thus, the resulting paid ULAE-to-paid claims ratio may misrepresent the true 
situation. A similar mismatch between paid ULAE and paid claims can occur if the volume is 
decreasing.  
 
                                                 
93 CAS Discussion Paper Program, May 1988. 
94 CAS Forum, Summer 1996. 
95 CAS Forum, Fall 1999. 
390

=== PDF PAGE 397 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Finally, we point out that inflation can also create distortions in the classical technique. In his 
1973 paper “Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves in an Inflationary Economic 
Environment,”96 John Kittel notes that the classical technique does include an inflation 
adjustment to the degree that total unpaid claims take inflation into account. If the costs 
underlying ULAE inflate at the same rate as claim costs, then inflation is accounted for. However, 
if different rates of inflation underlie the claims experience and ULAE, the estimated unpaid 
ULAE may not be predictive of future experience.  
 
Mango and Allen expand on this point: 
 
… the paid-to-paid ratio is distorted in  an upward direction under inflationary 
conditions. This distortion arises because the impact of inflation on the 
denominator of the ratio lags its impact on the numerator. This lag is due to the 
fact that most of the losses paid in a calendar year were incurred in a prior year, 
and thus are largely unaffected by the most recent inflation.
97 
 
In summary, the classical technique may not be appropriate for every situation. In particular, the 
classical technique may not be appropriate for: 
 
 Long-tail lines of business 
 
 Times of changing inflationary forces, either in the past or expected in the future 
 
 When an insurer is experiencing a rapid change in volume (either expansion or decrease in 
the size of its portfolio) 
 
 Where the 50/50 assumption is not an appropriate representation of the claims handling 
workflow  
 
 
Kittel Refinement 
 
In his 1973 paper, John Kittel describes a weakness in the classical technique: 
 
The concept upon which this method is based is to relate the paid unallocated 
loss adjustment expense cost to the work completed by the Loss Department 
measured in dollars of claim. Calendar year paid losses are used to represent the 
dollars of losses worked on by the Loss Department. There is an inconsistency 
here. The Loss Department, unfortunately, doesn’t just close claims. It also opens 
them. Paid losses don’t accurately represent the work done by the Loss 
Department since they do not take into account claims opened during the year 
which remain open at year end. This can be significant when loss reserves vary 
from year to year. A growing line with rapidly inflating loss costs could easily 
have loss reserves increasing at thirty to forty percent a year.
98 
 
                                                 
96 CAS Discussion Paper Program, 1981. 
 
97 CAS Forum, Fall 1999. 
98 CAS Discussion Paper Program, 1981. 
391

=== PDF PAGE 398 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Kittel refines the classical technique to explicitly recognize that ULAE is sustained as claims are 
reported even if no claim payments are made. The refinement recognizes that ULAE payments 
for a specific calendar year would not be expected to track perfectly with claim payments since 
actual ULAE is related to both the reporting and payment of claims. In contrast, the classical 
technique, by assuming a steady state, makes the implicit simplifying assumption that paid claims 
are approximately equal to reported claims, and thus the two quantities can be used 
interchangeably.  
 
 
Key Assumptions of Kittel Refinement 
 
Key assumptions of the Kittel refinement to the classical technique include: 
 
 ULAE is sustained as claims are reported even if no claim payments are made.  
 
 ULAE payments for a specific calendar year are related to both the reporting and payment of 
claims. 
 
Thus, in the Kittel refinement to the classical technique, an insurer’s ULAE-to-claim relationship 
is derived based on a review of the ratio of paid ULAE-to-the average of paid claims and 
incurred
99 claims to determine a reasonable approximation of the relationship of ultimate ULAE-
to-ultimate claims. In the Kittel refinement, calendar year incurred claims are defined to be 
calendar year paid claims plus the change in total claim liabilities, including both case 
outstanding and IBNR. 
 
Kittel derives his formula as follows: 
 
If we use the 50/50 assumption and ignore partial payments, the loss dollars 
processed with the calendar year paid unallocated loss adjustment expenses are: 
 
½ unit of work    x    payments on prior outstanding reserves 
1 complete unit    x    losses opened and paid during the year 
½ unit of work    x    losses opened remaining open 
 
The ratio of calendar year paid unallocated loss adjustment expense to the dollars 
of loss as represented above should be used as a more accurate starting point. 
 
If reserves are accurate, calendar year incurred = accident year incurred = losses 
opened and paid + opened remaining open.  
 
So, 
 
Calendar paid = opened and paid + paid on prior outstanding reserves 
Calendar incurred = opened and paid + opened remaining opened 
 
½ (calendar paid + incurred) =  Losses opened and paid 
          + ½ payments on prior outstanding 
          + ½ losses opened remaining open 
                                                 
99 It is important to note the use of the term incurred claims, which includes reported claims as well as 
IBNR.  
392

=== PDF PAGE 399 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
the desired quantity.100   
 
The second key assumption of the classical technique remains valid for the Kittel refinement. The 
relative volume and cost of future claims management activity on not-yet-reported claims and 
reported-but-not-yet-closed claims is expected to be proportional to the dollars of IBNR and case 
outstanding, respectively. Specifically, we assume that one-half of expenses are sustained when 
opening a claim and one-half of expenses when closing a claim.  
 
 
Mechanics of the Kittel Refinement 
 
We present the Kittel refinement to the classical technique in Exhibit II. There are four steps in 
this technique: 
 
 Develop ratio of historical calendar year paid ULAE-to-average of calendar year paid and 
calendar year incurred claims  
 
 Review historical ratios for trends or patterns 
 
 Select a ratio of ULAE-to-claims applicable to future claims payments 
 
 Apply 50% of the selected ULAE ratio to case outstanding and 100% of the selected 
ULAE ratio to IBNR 
 
Using Kittel’s refinement, we observe lower ULAE ratios than with the classical technique 
(traditional paid-to-paid approach). This is expected when incurred claims are greater than paid 
claims on a calendar year basis. For both techniques, we note that the ULAE ratios are lower for 
the two earliest years in the experience period (i.e., 2004 and 2005). Based on Kittel’s refinement, 
we select a ULAE ratio of 0.040. 
 
The final step of Kittel’s refined technique is identical to the classical technique. Assuming that 
one-half of a claim’s ULAE is sustained when the claim is reported and one-half when it is paid 
(i.e., closed), we estimate unpaid ULAE for XYZ Insurer to be $24.7 million using the formula 
with total IBNR and $18.8 million using the formula with an adjustment to determine pure IBNR. 
 
 $24.7 million = [(0.04 x 50% x $603 milli on) + (0.04 x 100% x $316 million)] 
 
     $18.8 million = [(0.04 x 50% x ($603 million + $297 million)) + (0.04 x 100% x $19 million)] 
 
The Kittel refinement does address the challenge identified in the classical technique related to 
sustaining ULAE for activities beyond simply paying a claim. However, the refinement does not 
explicitly address the issue associated with the definition of IBNR. Without specific modification 
of the formula to differentiate between IBNYR and IBNER, the Kittel technique could overstate 
the unpaid ULAE. 
 
 
                                                 
100 CAS Discussion Paper Program, 1981. 
393

=== PDF PAGE 400 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
When the Kittel Refinement Works and When it Does Not 
 
Although the Kittel refinement addresses the distortion created when using the classical technique 
for a growing insurer, it maintains the traditional 50/50 assumption regarding ULAE 
expenditures. Therefore it does not allow for the particular allocation of ULAE costs between 
opening, maintaining, and closing claims which may vary from insurer to insurer. Finally, the 
issue related to the potential for different rates of inflation between ULAE and claims remains in 
the Kittel refinement.  
 
 
Conger and Nolibos Method – Generalized Kittel Approach 
 
In developing their generalized approach as part of a specific client assignment, Conger and 
Nolibos sought to define a procedure to estimate unpaid ULAE that would: 
 
 Recognize an insurer’s rapid growth 
 
 Be consistent with patterns of the insurer’s ULAE expenditures over the life of a claim 
 
 Reproduce key concepts underlying the Johnson technique 
 
 Use commonly available and reliable aggregate payment and unpaid claims data 
 
 Include an extension to the Kittel refinement which would allow for alternatives to the 
traditional 50/50 rule 
 
The generalized approach employs the concept of weighted claims, which recognizes that claims 
use up different amounts of ULAE at different stages of their life cycle, from opening to closing. 
Newly opened, open, and newly closed claims are each given different weights when determining 
the claims basis to which ULAE payments during a past or future calendar period are related. 
Since Conger and Nolibos believe that handling costlier claims warrants and requires relatively 
more resources than handling smaller claims, they use claim dollars instead of claim counts in 
their generalized approach. 
 
The claim basis for a particular time period is defined to be the weighted average of the: 
 
 Ultimate cost of claims reported during the period (ultimate includes reported amounts and 
future development on known claims) 
 
 Ultimate cost of claims closed during the period (includes any future payment made after the 
closing of the claim)
101  
 
 Claims paid during the period 
 
Conger and Nolibos compare the claims basis of the generalized approach to Kittel’s introduction 
of a weighted average claims basis including incurred and paid claims. Kittel’s weights are fixed 
                                                 
101 Conger and Nolibos note that their approach assumes that there is no additional costs associated with 
reopening or reclosing a reopened claim. The formulas do provide, however, for the cost of maintaining 
reopened claims. 
394

=== PDF PAGE 401 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
at 50% for incurred claims and 50% for paid claims. By comparison, the generalized method 
introduces a third claim measure that allows distinguishing the cost of maintenance from the cost 
of closing. This is an important distinction for lines of business where a claim can remain open 
for an extended period of time with regular claim activity, such as workers compensation. The 
generalized approach also allows for flexibility in selecting the weights appropriate to the insurer 
and to the particular segment of business. 
 
 
Key Assumptions of Generalized Approach 
 
Key assumptions of the generalized approach include:  
 
 Expenditure of ULAE resources is proportional to the dollars of claims being handled. (This 
is in contrast to Johnson’s assumption that ULAE costs are independent of claim size and 
nature.) 
 
 ULAE amounts spent opening claims are proportional to the ultimate cost of claims being 
reported. 
 
 ULAE amounts spent maintaining claims are proportional to payments made. 
 
 ULAE amounts spent closing claims are proportional to the ultimate cost of claims being 
closed. 
 
Conger and Nolibos state that the appropriateness and sensitivity of these assumptions warrant 
further analysis, both as a matter of general research, and for a particular application of either 
method. For their particular application, the dollar proportionality was an assumption that 
produced reasonable indications of unpaid ULAE. 
 
 
Mechanics of Generalized Approach 
 
In the generalized approach, Conger and Nolibos define U1 + U2 + U3 = 100%, where: 
 
 U1 – percentage of ultimate ULAE spent opening claims 
 U2 – percentage of ultimate ULAE spent maintaining claims 
 U3 – percentage of ultimate ULAE spent closing claims 
 
In conducting an analysis of unpaid claims and expenses, the actuary would determine reasonable 
ranges for U1, U2, and U3 and would test the sensitivity of the final estimate of unpaid ULAE to 
variations within those ranges. 
 
It is worthwhile noting that the values of U
1, U2, and U3 could vary significantly from insurer to 
insurer and between lines of business. For example, a litigation-intense liability book of business 
might have a strong concentration of activity close to the time of claim settlement and payment. 
This contrasts with greater front-end costs associated with workers’ compensation claims. Conger 
and Nolibos developed a range of values for U1, U2, and U3 for a particular insurer and line of 
business based on interviews with claims personnel. They used the resulting ranges to test the 
consistency of the resulting ULAE ratios and the sensitivity of the ULAE ratios to different 
395

=== PDF PAGE 402 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
choices of U1, U2, and U3. Time and motion studies, as described by Joanne Spalla,102 could also 
be used to develop an empirical basis for the parameters. 
 
For a particular time period T, Conger and Nolibos define M, the total amount spent on ULAE 
during a time period T, to be 
 
M = (U1 x R x W) + (U2 x P x W) + (U3 x C x W), where 
 
 R – ultimate cost of claims reported during T 
 P – claims paid during T 
 C – the ultimate cost of claims closed during T 
 W – ratio of ultimate ULAE to ultimate claims (L) 
 
Conceptually, the time period T could represent activity occurring between t1 and t2 related to a 
particular accident year or for all accident years, where t1 and t2 are selected points in time. 
 
Conger and Nolibos algebraically derive the ratio W = M / B by defining B, the claims 
basis for the time period T to be: 
 
 B = (U
1 x R) + (U2 x P) + (U3 x C) 
 
Thus, M = B x W, and W = M / B. 
 
Each component of the claims basis can be understood conceptually as the value of the 
claims underlying the ULAE payments. Thus, 
 
 U1 x R represents claims basis for ULAE spent setting up new claims 
 U2 x P represents claims basis for ULAE spent maintaining open claims 
 U3 x C represents claims basis for ULAE spent closing existing claims 
 
In practice, insurers typically measure and report M, the ULAE payments during a period, on a 
calendar year basis. Once U1, U2, and U3 are estimated or selected, the claims basis B can be 
calculated from claim amounts R, P, and C, that can typically be determined from data and 
calculations underlying an actuarial analysis for estimating unpaid claims. In particular, M (total 
ULAE payments) and B (claim basis) can be calculated for historical calendar periods. By 
computing the ratio W (equal to M / B, where both M and B are expressed on a calendar year 
basis), we obtain ratios of ULAE to claims by calendar year. We then select an overall ratio of 
ULAE-to-claims, identified as W*, which is used in estimating future ULAE payments. 
 
Ultimate ULAE (U) for a group of accident years can be estimated as: 
 
  U = W* x L, where 
 
 W* is the selected ultimate ULAE-to-claims ratio 
 L is the independently estimated ultimate claims for the same group of accident years 
 
Using this approach for estimating ultimate ULAE, Conger and Nolibos suggest three different 
ways to estimate unpaid ULAE for a group of accident years. First, they note that unpaid ULAE 
                                                 
102 CAS Forum, Fall 1999. 
396

=== PDF PAGE 403 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
could be calculated simply by subtracting the amount of ULAE already paid (M) from the 
estimate of ultimate ULAE (U). 
 
 Unpaid ULAE = ( W* x L) - M 
 
Conger and Nolibos do not prefer this method as it presents both practical and conceptual 
difficulties. From a practical perspective, it may be difficult to quantify the historical paid ULAE 
that corresponds only to the accident year claims represented by L. Conceptually, this approach 
has some similarities to, and shares the potential distortions of, an expected claims ratio approach 
to estimating unpaid claims. In the expected claim technique, unpaid claims are estimated based 
on a predetermined expected claims ratio multiplied by earned premium less claims paid to date. 
As the period matures, the unpaid claim estimate can become increasingly distorted if actual paid 
claims do not approach the predetermined value of expected ultimate claims. 
 
The method preferred by Conger and Nolibos is similar to a Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique in 
that an a priori provision of unpaid ULAE is calculated. 
 
Unpaid ULAE = W* x (L - B) 
 
To assist in understanding this method, Conger and Nolibos present the derivation of this estimate 
(for a particular group of accident years). Assume that  
 
 R(t) – ultimate cost of claims known at time t 
 P(t) – total amount paid at time t 
 C(t) – ultimate cost of claims closed at time t 
 
Thus, unpaid ULAE can be estimated based on the following: 
 
 Unpaid ULAE = W*  x {U1 x [L – R(t)] + U2 x [L – P(t)] + U3 x [L – C(t)]}, where  
 
Each component of the unpaid ULAE formula represents a provision for the ULAE associated 
with: 
 
 Opening claims not yet reported 
 
 Making payments on currently active claims and on those claims that will be reported in the 
future 
 
 Closing “unclosed” claims (i.e., those claims that are open at time t and those claims that will 
be reported and opened in the future) 
 
By mathematically rearranging the equation, Conger and Nolibos obtain: 
 
Unpaid ULAE = W* x (L - B) 
 
This methodology assumes that the amount of ULAE paid to date and the unpaid ULAE are not 
directly related, except to the extent that these payments influence the selection of the ratio W*. 
This is similar to the assumption underlying the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique.
103  
                                                 
103 See Chapter 9 for a complete presentation of the Bornhuetter-Ferguson technique. 
397

=== PDF PAGE 404 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
 
The third and final method noted by Conger and Nolibos is similar to the claims development 
method. Unpaid ULAE could be estimated by the following formula: 
 
Unpaid ULAE = M x (L / B – 1.00) 
 
They note that such an approach implies that unpaid ULAE are proportional to paid amounts 
reported to date. Aside from the practical difficulty of establishing the ULAE amounts paid that 
correspond to accidents occurring during a particular period, this method, similar to the paid 
claims development method, may be overly responsive to random fluctuations in ULAE 
emergence. 
 
 
Application of Generalized Approach to Claim Counts 
 
Conger and Nolibos note that the generalized approach can also be used with claim counts or 
transaction counts. The formula for a claim count basis used in the determination of unpaid 
ULAE is:  
 
b = (v1 x r) + (v2 x o) + (v3 x c), where 
 
 r represents reported claim counts 
 o represents open claim counts 
 c represents closed claim counts 
 v1 is the estimate of the relative cost of handling the reporting of a claim (for one 
year) 
 v2 is the estimate of the relative cost of managing an open claim (for one year) 
 v3 is the estimate of the relative cost of closing a claim (for one year) 
 
As in Johnson’s paper, Conger and Nolibos suggest that is not necessary to determine the 
actual costs of the various claim activities but instead their relative magnitudes. For 
example, Johnson assumes that v1 = 2, v2 = 1, and v3 = 0.  
 
Using estimated v
1, v2, and v3, we can then select w* representing the ratio of ULAE to 
the claim count basis based on the historical data w = M / b, where M still represents 
ULAE payments. After selecting a value of w* (or a series of w*i which reflect future 
inflation adjustments), the unpaid ULAE can be estimated as: 
 
Unpaid ULAE = Σ w*i x [(v1 x ri) + (v2 x oi) + (v3 x ci)], where 
 
 ri represents the number of claims to be reported in each calendar year i 
 oi represents the number of open claims at the end of calendar year i 
 ci represents the claims to be closed during calendar year i 
 i represents the series of future calendar year-ends until all claims are closed 
 
In each case, only claims occurring on or before the valuation date should be considered. 
Note that a claim that stays open for a number of years is counted multiple times in the 
summation. This is consistent with the assumption that there are ULAE payments each 
year as long as a claim stays open. 
 
398

=== PDF PAGE 405 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
The above formula for claim counts is equivalent to that presented by Wendy Johnson. 
The formula could be adapted to reflect the Rahardjo and Mango-Allen concepts of cost 
varying over time by stratifying the claims activities more finely than just reporting, 
opening, and closing. 
 
 
Simplification of Generalized Approach 
 
Conger and Nolibos note that in many cases, the estimation of R (ultimate cost of 
reported claims) and C (ultimate cost of closed claims) may not be a trivial exercise.  
 
Another way to think about the ultimate costs of reported claims (R) is as the ultimate for 
the accident period ending on that date, reduced for the pure IBNR amounts, which 
represent the ultimate cost of not yet reported claims. Analogously, the ultimate cost of 
closed claims (C) as of a certain evaluation point represents the final cost of claims that 
are closed as of the valuation date including any subsequent payments. (Many times this 
may simply be equal to the paid on closed if the line of business does not have 
subsequent payments.) 
 
Conger and Nolibos present a simplification where estimates of R and C are not required. 
First, they use the estimate of ultimate claims for the accident year as a proxy for the 
ultimate costs of claims reported in the calendar year. The calendar year amount can be 
expressed exactly as the sum of the corresponding accident year ultimate claims and the 
pure IBNR at the beginning of the year less the pure IBNR at the end of the year. The 
actuary can evaluate the error in this approximation based on review of changes in 
exposures between accident years and the characteristics of the coverage being analyzed 
and make adjustments based on judgment as necessary. For example, given the minimal 
delay in the reporting of U.S. workers compensation claims, they state that one can often 
assume that the pure IBNR component of the ultimate is not likely to vary much from one 
accident year to the next. Thus, the accident year ultimate claims are likely a reasonable 
approximation for the true value of the parameter R. 
 
Second, if no particular additional effort is required to close an existing claim, then they 
note that the actuary can assume that U
3 equals zero. This assumption is not appropriate 
for all lines of business; for example, professional liability or employment practices 
liability are lines of business where a significant portion of the claims-related expenses 
will be incurred with its settlement. 
 
If it is appropriate, for a particular line of business, to assume that U
3 = 0, then U1 + U2 = 
100%, and we can approximate B, the claims basis for each calendar year as  
 
Est. B = (U1 x A) + (U2 x P), where  
 
A represents the ultimate claims for the accident year. We then calculate observed W 
values for each year as  
 
W = M / Est. B  
 
After a review of these observed ULAE ratios, we select an appropriate ratio W* for 
estimating unpaid ULAE. The next step is to estimate pure IBNR (perhaps by analyzing 
claim reporting patterns and ultimate severities) and deduct this estimate from L to obtain 
399

=== PDF PAGE 406 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
an estimate of the ultimate costs of claims reported to date (R). Unpaid ULAE is then 
calculated according to the formulas previously presented: 
  
Unpaid ULAE = W* x {L – [(U1 x R) + (U2 x P)]}, which can be expressed as 
 
Unpaid ULAE = W* x [U1 x (L – R) + U2 x (L – P)} 
 
 
Practical Difficulties with the Generalized Approach 
 
The generalized approach is consistent with the assumption that the claims adjusting activities 
associated with reopening and reclosing a claim have no cost. An alternative approach is to 
assume that the ultimate cost of closed claims C equals the sum of total amounts paid on 
closed claims as of the evaluation date. Under this approach, the cost of reclosing a claim is 
assumed to be equal to the cost of closing a claim of the same size. However, this alternative 
approach still fails to capture the cost of reopening claims. 
 
In cases where reopenings of claims are more than negligible, and the ULAE cost of such 
reopenings (and subsequent reclosings) is not immaterial, the actuary could obtain a separate 
provision for the cost of future claims handling activities related to claims that are closed as of 
the evaluation of unpaid ULAE. Conger and Nolibos suggest that this provision could perhaps 
be based on a study of the frequency of reopenings and average cost in ULAE of handling the 
reopened claims. 
 
As noted previously, the estimation of R and C, the ultimate cost of reported and closed 
claims, may not be trivial. Conger and Nolibos state that they have not attempted to measure 
the relative accuracy of the generalized method (as compared to other dollar-based methods) 
in an inflationary environment. They also identify two other issues that warrant further 
investigation: the effect of reopened claims on the accuracy of the estimates of unpaid ULAE, 
and how to modify the approach to properly reflect the change over time in the quantity or 
cost of resources dedicated to the handling of a claim, as that claim ages. 
 
 
Mango-Allen Refinement 
 
Donald F. Mango and Craig A. Allen discuss a variation of the Kittel refinement to the classical 
technique in their 1999 paper.
104 They specifically suggest a possible variation on the application 
of the formula when the actuary is working with a line of business where the actual historical 
calendar period claims are volatile, perhaps due to the random timing associated with the 
reporting or settlement of large claims. In this case, Mango and Allen suggest replacing the actual 
calendar period claims with expected claims for those historical calendar periods. They explain 
that the actuary can estimate the expected paid claims by applying selected reporting and payment 
patterns to a set of accident year estimated ultimate claims. This type of adjustment would be 
most useful for lines of business with a relatively small number of claims of widely varying sizes. 
 
 
                                                 
104 CAS Forum, Fall 1999. 
400

=== PDF PAGE 407 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Key Assumptions of Mango-Allen Refinement to the Classical Technique 
 
One key assumption of the Mango-Allen refinement of the classical technique is that an insurer’s 
ULAE-to-claim relationship is derived based on a review of the ratio of paid ULAE-to-expected 
paid claims. This differs from the classical technique where paid ULAE is compared to actual 
paid claims.  
 
The second key assumption of the classical technique remains valid for the Mango-Allen 
refinement. The relative volume and cost of future claims management activity on not-yet-
reported claims and reported-but-not-yet-closed claims is expected to be proportional to the 
dollars of IBNR and case outstanding, respectively. Specifically, we assume that one-half of 
expenses are sustained when opening a claim and one-half of expenses when closing a claim.  
 
 
Mechanics of Mango-Allen Refinement to the Classical Technique 
 
We present the Mango-Allen refinement to the classical technique in Exhibit III for New Small 
Insurer, a new insurer specializing in lawyers’ professional liability coverage. There are five steps 
in this technique: 
 
 Estimate calendar year expected paid claims 
 
 Develop ratio of historical calendar year paid ULAE-to-expected calendar year paid 
claims  
 Review historical ratios for trends or patterns 
 
 Select a ratio of ULAE-to-claims applicable to future claims payments 
 
 Apply 50% of the selected ULAE ratio to case outstanding and 100% of the selected 
ULAE ratio to IBNR 
 
In Exhibit III, Sheet 1, we begin the analysis by estimating expected paid claims for each of the 
four calendar years in the experience period (i.e., 2005 through 2008). Expected calendar year 
payments are based on direct earned premium multiplied by an expected claims ratio and the 
percentage expected to be paid in each year. Since New Small Insurer is a new company without 
credible historical claims experience, we rely on the claims ratio underlying the pricing analyses 
as well as insurance industry benchmark payment patterns.  
 
Once calendar year expected paid claims are determined, the analysis proceeds in a similar 
fashion as the classical technique. (See Exhibit III, Sheet 2.) We observe that the ratios of paid 
ULAE-to-actual paid claims are much more volatile than the ratios of paid ULAE-to-expected 
paid claims. We observe a pronounced downward trend in the paid ULAE-to-expected paid 
claims ratios. We seek to understand the reasons behind this trend by reviewing the assumptions 
underlying the development of expected paid claims and through discussions with management 
about actual paid ULAE.  
 
One explanation could be that the industry-based payments pattern for developing expected paid 
claims may be too fast for this particular insurer. We recognize that until a sufficient volume of 
credible experience is developed, we are challenged in the selection of appropriate development 
patterns. Another explanation of the variability and downward trends could be related to large 
401

=== PDF PAGE 408 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
claims. We know from a review of claims data that there are several open claims for the most 
recent accident years in litigation with large case outstanding values and minimal payments to 
date.  
 
After discussion with management about the specific categories of costs underlying the paid 
ULAE, its expectations for the upcoming several years, and a review of current claims data, we 
select a ratio of 0.07 for estimating unpaid ULAE. Thus, for New Small Insurer, we estimate 
unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 of $457,975 using total IBNR and $236,761 using pure IBNR. 
 
 $457,975 = [(0.070 x 50% x $225,000) + (0.070 x 100% x $6,430,000)] 
 
$236,761 = {[0.070 x 50% x ($225,000 + (6,430,000 – 109,588))] + [0.070 x 100% x 
$109,588]} 
 
 
When the Mango-Allen Refinement Works and When it Does Not 
 
The Mango-Allen refinement is a valuable alternative for insurers with limited experience or 
highly volatile claims payment experience. For such insurers, a method using reported claims 
instead of paid claims may provide a more stable base for projection purposes. However, for 
organizations with a sufficient volume of paid claims experience, the additional calculations 
required to estimate expected paid claims may not be necessary as the relative improvement to 
the accuracy of projected unpaid ULAE may not justify the time and costs involved. 
 
 
Count-Based Techniques 
 
Mango and Allen describe two major drawbacks of the use of claims as a base for comparison 
relative to the use of claim counts for estimating unpaid ULAE.105 First, the amount of ULAE is 
not solely dependent on the magnitude of the accompanying claim dollars. ULAE is also 
dependent on the average claim size. For example, we expect that the ULAE required to settle a 
one million-dollar claim is probably less than the ULAE required to settle ten $100,000 claims. 
However, the classical technique with its use of a paid-to-paid ratio does not recognize this 
difference. 
 
The second disadvantage noted by Mango and Allen is that the estimate of unpaid ULAE 
becomes a “rider” on the estimate of unpaid claims, responding to whatever volatility is present in 
the estimate of ultimate claims. In practice, we do not expect the unpaid ULAE to respond fully 
to fluctuations in claim amounts. Mango and Allen cite the example of a sudden drop in claim 
counts or in the value of claims. We would not expect an immediate drop in the overhead 
expenses or the number of claims management personnel. 
 
In this section, we briefly describe several approaches that have been developed since the mid-
1960s. One of the most significant challenges an actuary faces in using count-based techniques is 
the availability of accurate and consistent claim count data or refined transaction and expense 
information for an insurer.  
 
A key assumption in count-based techniques is that the same kind of transaction costs the same 
amount of ULAE regardless of the claim size. Conger and Nolibos note that because count-based 
                                                 
105 CAS Actuarial Society Forum, Fall 1999. 
402

=== PDF PAGE 409 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
techniques typically include some parameter to reflect the cost of ongoing management and 
maintenance of claims, they also imply that a claim that stays open longer will cost 
proportionately more than a quick-closing claim, at least with respect to some component of 
ULAE. 
 
 
Early Count Techniques 
 
Conger and Nolibos discuss a 1967 proposal for a count-based ULAE technique by R.E. Brian in 
the Insurance Accounting and Statistical Association Proceedings. Brian suggested breaking the 
ULAE process into five kinds of transactions: 
 
 Setting up new claims 
 Maintaining outstanding claims 
 Making a single payment 
 Closing a claim 
 Reopening a claim 
 
In the Brian technique, the actuary projects the future number of each type of transaction. Brian 
estimated that each of these transactions would carry a similar cost, and suggested estimating the 
cost per transaction using ratios of historical ULAE expenditures to the number of claim 
transactions occurring during the same calendar periods.  
 
The primary assumption of this technique, which Conger and Nolibos identify as a weakness is 
that each of the five kinds of claims transactions requires similar ULAE resources and 
expenditures. The weakness of this assumption could easily be remedied by refining the formula 
to allow for different costs for the different types of transactions. A more significant weakness of 
this technique is the practical difficulty in estimating both the number of future transactions and 
the average cost of each transaction. Data supporting these projections (reliable and consistent 
claim count and claim transaction data) is often not readily available. 
 
 
Wendy Johnson Technique 
 
In her paper “Determination of Outstanding Liabilities for Unallocated Loss Adjustment 
Expenses,”
106 Wendy Johnson follows a similar approach to Brian’s but focuses on two key 
transactions: reporting and maintenance. Johnson, like Brian, then projects the future number of 
newly reported claims, as well as the number of claims that will be in a pending status each year – 
and thus will require maintenance work during the year. Also like Brian, Johnson estimates the 
cost of each transaction by comparing historical aggregate ULAE expenditures to the number of 
transactions occurring in the same time period. 
 
The Johnson technique allows for an explicit differential in the amount of ULAE resource or 
cost required for different types of claim transactions. She provides a specific medical 
malpractice example in which, based on qualitative input, the process of opening a claim costs 
$x and the process of maintaining existing claims costs an additional $x. 
 
                                                 
106 CAS Discussion Paper Program, May 1988. 
403

=== PDF PAGE 410 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Alternative weights as well as additional transaction types could be introduced directly into 
Johnson’s formula. The benefit of Johnson’s approach is that it only requires the actuary to 
estimate the relative amount of resources required for each transaction type and does not 
require the actuary to perform detailed time-and-motion studies to calculate the actual cash 
cost of each transaction type. 
 
The mechanics of the Johnson technique involve estimating the ULAE cost per claim activity 
by calculating weighted claim counts (using the relative transaction costs as weights) based on 
historical data and comparing those weighted claim counts to the total ULAE costs in the same 
historical period. In this technique, we then obtain the estimate of unpaid ULAE by projecting 
the number of, and the ULAE cost associated with, weighted claim counts at each subsequent 
year-end, related only to claims occurring prior to the reserve valuation date. 
 
 
Mango-Allen Claim Staffing Technique 
 
Mango and Allen introduce a claim staffing technique to respond to shortcomings they 
observed in the Johnson method.107 They state that the technique is closer to a “transaction-
based method.” They calculate estimated unpaid ULAE using future claim staff workload 
levels and a new projection base, which is equal to the sum of calendar year opened, closed, 
and pending claims (OCP claims). 
Actuaries using the claim staffing technique project the following four components: 
 
 Future calendar year OCP claims 
 Future calendar year claim staff workloads, which are expressed as OCP claims per staff 
member 
 Future calendar year claim staff count 
 Future calendar year ULAE per claim staff member 
 
Future calendar year ULAE payments, which include consideration of inflation, are equal to 
the product of future claim staff count and future ULAE per claim staff member. The 
estimated unpaid ULAE is the sum of future calendar year ULAE payments.  
 
Mango and Allen cite three characteristics of OCP claims that make their use as a base for the 
claim staffing method appealing: 
 
1. It is a reasonable proxy for claims department activity. It is arguably directly 
proportional to levels of claim activity, especially number of staff and 
workload levels of the staff. 
2. It is claim count based. As mentioned above, paid loss is not a particularly 
effective or responsive base for projecting ULAE. Claims counts (if case 
complexity issues are addressed) bear a more direct relationship to claim 
staff activity. 
3. It is derivable from typical reserve study information. Projected opened, 
closed and pending claims are derivable from ultimate claim counts, a claim 
reporting pattern and a claim closing pattern.
108 
 
                                                 
107 CAS Forum, Fall 1999. 
108 CAS Forum, Fall 1999. 
404

=== PDF PAGE 411 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Conger and Nolibos note that the estimate of unpaid ULAE is likely to be quite sensitive to the 
magnitude of the selected parameters. In addition, the estimates will be influenced by parameters 
not explicitly considered in the article, such as the implicit assumption that equal amounts of 
ULAE resources are required to open, close, and handle one average claim for a year. 
 
 
Rahardjo  
 
In her paper “A Methodology for Pricing and Reserving for Claim Expenses in Workers 
Compensation,”
109 Kay Kellogg Rahardjo discusses the fact that different levels of work effort 
are required for handling claims in the first 30 days than for claims that have been open for five 
years. One focus of Rahardjo’s paper is the length of time for which workers compensation 
claims remain open, which she defines to be the “duration.” She states: “As duration increases, so 
does the expense of handling the claim for the remainder of the claim’s life.” 
 
Rahardjo also presents a methodology for pricing claims-handling services which is applicable to 
third-party claims administrators (TPAs). Self-insurance and large deductible plans are now 
commonplace means of financing risk. However, few self-insureds handle their own risks; instead 
they outsource those responsibilities to TPAs. Thus, Rahardjo’s technique could be useful to such 
organizations in need of a method for estimating the cost of future TPAs claims handling (i.e., 
unpaid ULAE). 
 
 
Spalla 
 
Joanne Spalla asserts that manual time-and-motion studies are no longer necessary to determine 
the costs of various claim-related activities and transactions. Since so many claims-related 
activities are computer-supported, she suggests using modern claim department information 
systems to track the time spent on individual claims by level of employee.  
 
By combining individual claim management activities into somewhat more macroscopic 
transactions, it is feasible to calculate the average cost of each type of claim transaction. These 
average claim costs, loaded for overhead and other costs that are not captured by the 
computerized tracking systems, can be applied within analytical frameworks as described by 
Rahardjo and Mango-Allen (claim staffing technique).  
 
A benefit of working with the underlying cost data that Spalla describes is that it allows for more 
detailed analysis of the claim activity costs. Using the detailed information, the actuary can 
determine which types of claim transactions and which stages of the claim life cycle have 
relatively similar (or different) costs. This insight can then assist the actuary in selecting different 
costs for different transactions for the purpose of estimating unpaid ULAE. 
 
Conger and Nolibos suggest “that the actuary using Spalla’s method consider an equally 
important additional step as a ‘reality check’: if the selected costs per transaction were applied to 
the numbers of transactions that were undertaken last year, would the result match that period’s 
actual total ULAE expenditures?” 
 
While Spalla describes determining the actual cost, the approach could also be used to quantify 
the relative amount of cost per transaction as compared to the cost of other kinds of claim 
                                                 
109 CAS Forum, Summer 1996. 
405

=== PDF PAGE 412 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
transactions. This relativity is less subject to annual change than the dollar cost per transaction or 
per activity. With relativities, the actuary could then use the general approaches described in 
Rahardjo and Mango-Allen, but now with some quantitative basis for the magnitude of the 
parameters. 
 
 
Triangle-Based Techniques 
 
Actuaries can also estimate ULAE using triangle-based development techniques. A key 
difference between triangle analysis of claims experience and ULAE experience is the method 
used to assign ULAE to individual cells (accident year by evaluation year) of the triangle. Since 
“actual” ULAE by accident year is not observable, at least not for all categories of ULAE, the 
actuary will need to formulate assumptions for the creation of the paid ULAE triangle. This 
allocation of ULAE payments is typically based on the pattern of claim payments, which can be 
observed. It is important to recognize, however, that the accident year triangles of ULAE may be 
distorted if either the method of allocating calendar ULAE to accident years changes over time or 
if the claims payment patterns change. 
 
In the paper “Testing of Loss Adjustment (Allocated) Expense Reserves,”
110 R.S. Slifka suggests 
using a time-and-motion study to estimate the claim department’s allocation of resources between 
current accident year claims and prior accident year claims. This relationship between the “cost” 
of current year’s claim management activities and prior years’ claim management activities can 
be used then to estimate the future payment activities. Assume for example that a time and 
motion study suggests that: 
 
 60% of the current accident year’s ULAE remains unpaid 
 15% of the prior accident year’s ULAE remains unpaid 
 5% of the second prior accident year’s ULAE remains unpaid 
 
The total unpaid ULAE is estimated as 80% (60% + 15% + 5%) of a typical calendar year’s 
ULAE payment. Conger and Nolibos note that although this technique presumes a steady state, it 
can be refined to reflect volume growth as well as the effects of inflation.  
 
A third technique is the construction of paid ULAE triangles based on time and motion studies. 
For example, assume that time and motion studies suggest that 50% of ULAE is paid at the time a 
claim is reported and the remaining 50% is paid in proportion to claim payments. An actuary can 
then assign historical calendar ULAE to accident year-calendar year cohorts: 50% according to 
the distribution of reported claims across current accident year, prior accident year, second prior 
accident year, and so on; and 50% according to the distribution of paid claims, as indicated by an 
appropriate accident year claims payment pattern. Once the ULAE triangle is constructed, the 
actuary can apply the traditional development technique to estimate ultimate ULAE and indicated 
unpaid ULAE. 
 
While triangular methods can theoretically be used to project ultimate ULAE and indicated 
unpaid expenses, in practice, ULAE triangle projections are rarely used by actuaries. 
 
 
                                                 
110 Proceedings of the IASA, 1968. 
406

=== PDF PAGE 413 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
Comparison Example 
 
In their paper “Estimating ULAE Liabilities: Rediscovering and Expanding Kittel’s 
Approach,” Conger and Nolibos provide an example of a U.S. workers compensation insurer 
who has been in operations for six years. In Exhibit IV, Sheet 1, we summarize the calendar 
year and accident year experience data from their example and have named it PQR Insurer.  
 
Over the course of its six years of operations, paid ULAE averaged approximately 18% of 
claims. Observing the downward trend in the paid-to-paid ratios in Exhibit IV, Sheet 2, 
Column (6), an actuary using the traditional technique may select a ULAE ratio of 16% and 
derive estimated unpaid ULAE of $41.6 million. In Column (7), we use the Kittel refinement 
and estimate unpaid ULAE of $29.9 million. 
 
For PQR Insurer, Conger and Nolibos found that ULAE expenditures are concentrated more 
heavily towards the front end of the claim than are the claim payments. Consider a 
hypothetical extreme, in which all ULAE is incurred at the moment the claim occurs, with the 
amount of the ULAE being proportional to the size of the claim. In this hypothetical situation, 
the appropriate relationship to examine would be the ratio of ULAE to ultimate claims for an 
accident period.
111 They also observe that the growth of PQR Insurer will result in an 
overstatement of the estimated unpaid ULAE using the traditional technique. 
 
Interviews with management of PQR Insurer and examination of the flows of work and 
allocation of resources in the claims department suggested that approximately 60% to 70% of 
the work for a claim is concentrated at the time the claim is reported, and 30% to 40% of the 
work is spread over the remaining life of the claim. For PQR Insurer, no particular extra 
degree of effort is required to close the claim. Since ULAE expenditures are heavier at the 
beginning of the claim’s life cycle, it is not surprising that the estimated unpaid ULAE using 
the Kittel refinement results in a lower estimate of unpaid ULAE ($29.9 million) than the 
traditional technique ($41.6 million). 
 
In Exhibit IV, Sheet 3, we present the Conger and Nolibos generalized method with U
1 equal 
to 60%, U2 equal to 40%, and U3 equal to 0%. Columns (2) through (4) are based on the 
calendar year historical experience presented in Exhibit IV, Sheet 1. The claims basis in 
Column (5) is equal to 60% of the ultimate on claims reported in the year (R) and 40% of paid 
claims (C). The ULAE ratio in Column (6) is equal to paid ULAE in column (2) divided by 
the claims basis in Column (5). A ULAE ratio of 10% is selected based on a review of the 
historical experience by year. The estimated unpaid ULAE is calculated in Line (9) using the 
three approaches described in the previous section: 
 
 Expected claim method = [(selected ULAE ratio x ultimate claims) – total paid ULAE to 
date] 
 
 Bornhuetter-Ferguson method = [selected ULAE ratio x (ultimate claims – total claims 
basis)] 
 
 Development method = {[(ultimate claims / total claims basis) – 1.00] x total paid ULAE 
to date} 
 
                                                 
111 The reader should recognize elements of the suggested simplification of the generalized method in the 
discussion of this extreme situation. 
407

=== PDF PAGE 414 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
Chapter 17– Estimating Unpaid Unallocated Claim Adjustment Expenses 
 
 
In Exhibit IV, Sheet 4, we present similar calculations assuming that U1 equal to 70%, U2 
equal to 30%, and U3 equal to 0%. 
 
The final exhibit presents the Conger and Nolibos simplified generalized approach. We 
present a range of estimated unpaid ULAE assuming that pure IBNR is equal to either 4% of 
the latest accident year ultimate claims or 6% of the latest accident year ultimate claims. 
 
In practice, many actuaries only use one method to estimate unpaid ULAE. In determining 
which method to use, an actuary should have a selection criterion for assessing the various 
alternative methods. One approach many actuaries rely on is to evaluate the results in terms of 
the number of years of payments indicated by the unpaid estimate. The expected number of 
future year payments will vary depending on the types of insurance in insurer’s portfolio. For 
example, for short-tail lines of insurance, the actuary may expect the estimate of unpaid 
ULAE to represent one to two years of additional calendar year payments. However, for long-
tail lines of coverage, the estimated unpaid ULAE may be expected to represent three to four 
years of payments. 
 
408

=== PDF PAGE 415 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit I
XYZ Insurer - Classical Technique
Development of Unpaid ULAE
Ratio of
Calendar Paid Paid Paid ULAE to
Year ULAE Claims Paid Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4)
2004 14,352,000      333,000,000     0.043
2005 15,321,000      358,000,000    0.043
2006 16,870,000      334,000,000    0.051
2007 17,112,000      347,000,000    0.049
2008 17,331,000      391,000,000    0.044
Total 80,986,000      1,763,000,000 0.046
(5) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.045
(6) Case Outstanding at 12/31/08 603,000,000    
(7) Total IBNR at 12/31/08 316,000,000    
(8) Pure IBNR at 12/31/08 19,000,000      
(9) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 27,787,500      
        Using Total IBNR
(10) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 21,105,000      
        Using Pure IBNR
Column and Line Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(4) = [(2) / (3)].
(5) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (4).
(6) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(7) Based on actuarial analysis at 12/31/08 for all lines combined.
(8) Estimated assuming pure IBNR is equal to 5% of accident year
     2008 ultimate claims. Ultimate claims for all lines combined for
     accident year 2008 are $380 million for XYZ Insurer.
(9) = {[(5) x 50% x (6)] + [(5) x 100% x (7)]}.
(10) = {[(5) x 50% x ((6) + (7) - (8))] + [(5) x 100% x (8)]}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_1 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
409

=== PDF PAGE 416 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit II
XYZ Insurer - Kittel Technique
Development of Unpaid ULAE
Average ULAE Ratio - Paid ULAE to
Calendar Paid Paid Incurred Paid and Inc. Paid Avg Paid and
Year ULAE Claims Claims Claims Claims Inc. Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2004 14,352,000    333,000,000     535,213,000     434,106,500     0.043 0.033
2005 15,321,000    358,000,000     492,265,000     425,132,500     0.043 0.036
2006 16,870,000    334,000,000     435,985,000     384,992,500     0.051 0.044
2007 17,112,000    347,000,000     432,966,000     389,983,000     0.049 0.044
2008 17,331,000    391,000,000     475,300,000     433,150,000     0.044 0.040
Total 80,986,000    1,763,000,000 2,371,729,000  2,067,364,500  0.046 0.039
(8) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.040
(9) Case Outstanding at 12/31/08 603,000,000  
(10) Total IBNR at 12/31/08 316,000,000  
(11) Pure IBNR at 12/31/08 19,000,000    
(12) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 Using Total IBNR 24,700,000    
(13) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 Using Pure IBNR 18,760,000    
Column and Line Notes:
(2) through (4) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(5) = [Average of (3) and (4)].
(6) = [(2) / (3)].
(7) = [(2) / (5)].
(8) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (7).
(9) Based on data from XYZ Insurer.
(10) Based on actuarial analysis at 12/31/08 for all lines combined.
(11) Estimated assuming pure IBNR is equal to 5% of accident year 2008 ultimate claims.
       Ultimate claims for all lines combined for accident year 2008 are $380 million for XYZ Insurer.
(12) = {[(8) x 50% x (9)] + [(8) x 100% x (10)]}.
(13) = {[(8) x 50% x ((9) + (10) - (11))] + [(8) x 100% x (11)]}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_2 06/05/2010  3:08 PM
410

=== PDF PAGE 417 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit III
New Small Insurer - Mango-Allen Refinement Technique Sheet 1
Development of Expected Paid Claims in Calendar Year
Direct Expected
Accident Earned Claims Expected Expected Payment Percentage in Calendar Year Expected Claims Paid in Calendar Year
Year Premium Ratio Claims 2005 2006 2007 2008 2005 2006 2007 2008
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
2005 4,300,000     55% 2,365,000  12% 15% 15% 15% 283,800      354,750      354,750      354,750      
2006 4,250,000     55% 2,337,500  12% 15% 15% 280,500     350,625      350,625      
2007 4,420,000     55% 2,431,000  12% 15% 291,720     364,650      
2008 3,985,000     55% 2,191,750  12% 263,010     
Total 16,955,000  9,325,250  283,800     635,250      997,095      1,333,035  
Column Notes:
(2) Based on information provided by New Small Insurer.
(3) Based on actuarial analysis conducted for pricing purposes.
(4) = [(2) x (3)].
(5) through (8) Based on actuarial analysis of insurance industry benchmark paid claims development experience.
(9) = [(4) x (5)].
(10) = [(4) x (6)].
(11) = [(4) x (7)].
(12) = [(4) x (8)].
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_3_1 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
411

=== PDF PAGE 418 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit III
New Small Insurer - Mango-Allen Refinement Technique Sheet 2
Development of Unpaid ULAE
ULAE Ratio
Calendar Paid Paid Claims Paid ULAE-to-Paid Claims
Year ULAE Actual Expected Actual Expected
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
2005 55,000      1,253,450    283,800       0.044 0.194
2006 62,500      86,000        635,250       0.727 0.098
2007 70,000      410,650       997,095       0.170 0.070
2008 80,000      309,600       1,333,035    0.258 0.060
Total 267,500     2,059,700    3,249,180    0.130 0.082
(7) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.070
(8) Case Outstanding at 12/31/08 225,000          
(9) Total IBNR at 12/31/08 6,430,000       
(10) Pure IBNR at 12/31/08 109,588          
(11) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 Using Total IBNR 457,975          
(12) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/al Using Pure IBNR 236,761          
Column and Line Notes:
(2) and (3) Based on data from New Small Insurer.
(4) Developed in Exhibit III, Sheet 1.
(5) = [(2) / (3)].
(6) = [(2) / (4)].
(7) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (6) and input of management of New Small Insurer.
(8) Based on claims data from New Small Insurer.
(9) Based on actuarial analysis at 12/31/08.
(10) Estimated assuming pure IBNR is equal to 5% of accident year expected claims.
(11) = {[(7) x 50% x (8)] + [(7) x 100% x (9)]}.
(12) = {[(7) x 50% x ((8) + (9) - (10))] + [(7) x 100% x (10)]}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_3_2 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
412

=== PDF PAGE 419 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit IV
PQR Insurer Sheet 1
Summary of Input Parameters ($000)
Calendar Year Ult on Claims Accident Year
Paid Paid Reported Reported in Ultimate IBNR at Reported
Year ULAE Claims Claims Calendar Year Claims 12/31/08 Claims
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
2003 1,978             4,590             19,534           27,200           28,600           257                28,343           
2004 4,820             14,600           57,125           76,700           79,200           1,742             77,458           
2005 8,558             38,390           85,521           106,900         108,400         5,095             103,305         
2006 12,039           58,297           128,672         154,300         156,700         16,140           140,560         
2007 13,143           86,074           145,070         163,100         163,400         34,477           128,923         
2008 15,286           105,466         163,626         176,400         177,100         56,141           120,959         
Total 55,824           307,417         599,548         704,600         713,400         113,852         599,548         
Note: Claims include allocated claim adjustment expenses.
Column Notes:
(2) through (4) Based on data from PQR Insurer. Reported claims represent paid claims, case outstanding, and estimated IBNR.
(5) through (7) Based on actuarial analysis at year-end 2008.
(8) Based on data from PQR Insurer. Includes paid claims, case outstanding, and estimated IBNR.ULAE exhibits.xls 17_4_1 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
413

=== PDF PAGE 420 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit IV
PQR Insurer Sheet 2
Classical and Kittel Techniques ($000)
ULAE Ratio -
Paid ULAE to
Average of Paid Avg Paid &
Calendar Paid Paid Reported Paid and Rptd Claims Rptd Claims
Year ULAE Claims Claims Claims Traditional Kittel
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
2003 1,978              4,590               19,534            12,062            0.431 0.164
2004 4,820              14,600            57,125            35,863            0.330 0.134
2005 8,558              38,390            85,521            61,956            0.223 0.138
2006 12,039            58,297            128,672          93,485            0.207 0.129
2007 13,143            86,074            145,070          115,572          0.153 0.114
2008 15,286            105,466          163,626          134,546          0.145 0.114
Total 55,824            307,417          599,548          453,484          0.182 0.123
(8) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.160 0.115
(9) Case Outstanding at 12/31/08 292,130        292,130        
(10) IBNR at 12/31/08 113,853        113,853        
(11) Estimated Unpaid ULAE at 12/31/08 41,587          29,891          
Column and Line Notes:
(2) through (4) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(5) = [Average of (3) and (4)].
(6) = [(2) / (3)].
(7) = [(2) / (5)].
(8) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (6) and (7).
(9) Based on data from PQR Insurer.
(10) Based on actuarial analysis at 12/31/08 for all lines combined.
(11) = {[(8) x 50% x (9)] + [(8) x 100% x (10)]}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_4_2 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
414

=== PDF PAGE 421 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit IV
PQR Insurer Sheet 3
Conger and Nolibos Generalized Approach - 60/40 Assumption ($000)
Ult on Claims
Calendar Paid Reported in Paid Claims ULAE
Year ULAE Calendar Year Claims Basis Ratio
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
2003 1,978             27,200            4,590              18,156            0.109
2004 4,820             76,700            14,600            51,860            0.093
2005 8,558             106,900         38,390            79,496            0.108
2006 12,039           154,300          58,297            115,899          0.104
2007 13,143           163,100          86,074            132,290          0.099
2008 15,286           176,400          105,466          148,026          0.103
Total 55,824           704,600          307,417          545,727          0.102
(7) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.100
(8) Ultimate Claims 713,400          
(9) Indicated Unpaid ULAE Using:
     (a) Expected Claim Method 15,516            
     (b) Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method 16,767            
     (c) Development Method 17,152            
Column and Line Notes:
(2) through (4) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(5) = {[(3) x 60%] + [(4) x 40%]}.  
(6) = [(2) / (5)].
(7) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (6).
(8) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(9a) = {[(7) x (8)] - (Total in (2))}.
(9b) = {(7) x [(8) - (Total in (5))]}.
(9c) = {{[(8) / (Total in (5))] - 1.00} x (Total in (2))}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_4_3 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
415

=== PDF PAGE 422 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit IV
PQR Insurer Sheet 4
Conger and Nolibos Generalized Approach - 70/30 Assumption ($000)
Ult on Claims
Calendar Paid Reported in Paid Claims ULAE
Year ULAE Calendar Year Claims Basis Ratio
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
2003 1,978             27,200            4,590              20,417            0.097
2004 4,820             76,700            14,600            58,070            0.083
2005 8,558             106,900         38,390            86,347            0.099
2006 12,039           154,300          58,297            125,499          0.096
2007 13,143           163,100          86,074            139,992          0.094
2008 15,286           176,400          105,466          155,120          0.099
Total 55,824           704,600          307,417          585,445          0.095
(7) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.100
(8) Ultimate Claims 713,400          
(9) Indicated Unpaid ULAE Using:
     (a) Expected Claim Method 15,516            
     (b) Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method 12,795            
     (c) Development Method 12,201            
Column and Line Notes:
(2) through (4) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(5) = {[(3) x 70%] + [(4) x 30%]}.  
(6) = [(2) / (5)].
(7) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (6).
(8) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(9a) = {[(7) x (8)] - (Total in (2))}.
(9b) = {(7) x [(8) - (Total in (5))]}.
(9c) = {{[(8) / (Total in (5))] - 1.00} x (Total in (2))}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_4_4 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
416

=== PDF PAGE 423 ===
Chapter 17 - Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses Exhibit IV
PQR Insurer Sheet 5
Conger and Nolibos Simplified Generalized Approach - 60/40 Assumption ($000)
Cal Year Acc Year Cal Year
Paid Ultimate Paid Claims ULAE
Year ULAE Claims Claims Basis Ratio
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
2003 1,978              28,600             4,590              18,996             0.104
2004 4,820              79,200             14,600             53,360             0.090
2005 8,558              108,400          38,390             80,396             0.106
2006 12,039            156,700           58,297             117,339           0.103
2007 13,143            163,400           86,074             132,470           0.099
2008 15,286            177,100           105,466           148,446           0.103
Total 55,824            713,400          307,417          551,007          0.101
(7) Selected ULAE Ratio 0.100
(8) Ultimate Claims 713,400          
(9) Estimated Pure IBNR Based on
     (a)  4% of Latest Accident Year Ultimate Claims 7,084              
     (b)  6% of Latest Accident Year Ultimate Claims 10,626            
(10) Indicated Unpaid ULAE Using
     (a)  4% of Latest Accident Year Ultimate Claims 16,664            
     (b)  6% of Latest Accident Year Ultimate Claims 16,877            
Column and Line Notes:
(2) through (4) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(5) = {[(3) x 60%] + [(4) x 40%]}.  
(6) = [(2) / (5)].
(7) Selected based on ULAE ratios in (6).
(8) From Exhibit IV, Sheet 1.
(9a) = [4% x (accident year 2008 ultimate claims in (3))].
(9b) = [6% x (accident year 2008 ultimate claims in (3))].
(10a) = {(7) x [60% x (9a)] + {40% x [(8) - (Total in (4))]}}.
(10b) = {(7) x [60% x (9b)] + {40% x [(8) - (Total in (4))]}}.
ULAE exhibits.xls 17_4_5 06/05/2010 3:08 PM
417

=== PDF PAGE 424 ===
Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques 
 
 
 
APPENDICES – STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES AND 
ACTUARIAL STANDARDS OF PRACTICE 
 
 
Appendix A – Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss 
and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves ...............................................................................  419 
 
Appendix B – Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 43 Property/Casualty Unpaid 
Claim Estimates .....................................................................................................................  429 
 
Appendix C – Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 9 Documentation and Disclosure  
in Property and Casualty Insurance Ratemaking, Loss Reserving, and Valuations ..............  440 
 
 
* * * * * * 
 
Actuaries practicing in the U.S. are subject to the professional requirements of the CAS and the 
Academy; actuaries practicing in Canada must meet the professional requirements of the CIA. 
The requirements for these organizations come in the form of Standards of Practice, Educational 
Notes, Statement of Principles, and other professional guidelines. In this part, we address some of 
the key professional obligations of the actuary that are related to reserving as promulgated by the 
CAS and the Academy.  
 
According to the NAIC’s “Quarterly and Annual Statement Instructions for the year 2007, 
Property/Casualty”: 
 
The Statement of Actuarial Opinion, the AOS, and the supporting Actuarial 
Report and Workpapers, should be consistent with the appropriate Actuarial 
Standards of Practice (ASOPs), including but not limited to ASOPs 9, 23, and 36, 
as promulgated by the Actuarial Standards Board, and Statements of Principles 
adopted by the Casualty Actuarial Society.  
 
In Appendices A through C, we include, in their entirety, the CAS Statement of Principles and 
ASOP 9. ASOP 23 relates to data quality and ASOP 36 to Statements of Actuarial Opinion for 
P&C Loss and LAE Reserves; these two ASOPs can be found on the Academy’s Web Site. 
 
 
     
 
418

=== PDF PAGE 425 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
APPENDIX A – STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES REGARDING 
PROPERTY AND CASUALTY LOSS AND LOSS ADJUSTMENT 
EXPENSE RESERVES  
 
 
The CAS adopted the “Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss and Loss 
Adjustment Expense Reserves” (CAS Statement of Principles) in May 1988. In this appendix, we 
include the CAS Statement of Principles in its entirety. Throughout this text we relied on the 
definitions included in the Statement of Principles. In Parts 3 and 4 of this book, we expand on 
the principles and considerations cited below.  
 
* * * * * 
 
The purpose of this statement is to identify and describe principles applicable to the evaluation 
and review of loss and loss adjustment expense reserves. Because of their size and the 
uncertainties in the estimation process, the evaluation of these reserves requires the use of proper 
actuarial and statistical procedures. The financial condition of a property and casualty insurer 
cannot be assessed accurately without sound reserve estimates. 
 
This statement consists of three parts: 
 
Definitions 
Principles 
Considerations 
 
The definitions in the next section apply to both claims reserves and loss adjustment expense 
reserves. For the purpose of this statement the terms “loss” and “claim” are used interchangeably, 
and the term “insurer” is meant to represent any risk bearer for property and casualty exposures, 
whether an insurance company, self-insured entity or other. 
 
 
I. Definitions 
 
A claims reserve is a provision for its related liability. A total claims reserve is composed of five 
elements, although the five elements may not necessarily be individually quantified: 
 
 case reserve 
 provision for future development on known claims 
 reopened claims reserve 
 provision for claims incurred but not reported  
 provision for claims in transit (incurred and reported but not recorded) 
 
Before these five elements are discussed, certain key dates and terms need to be defined. 
 
The accounting date is the date that defines the group of claims for which liability may exist, 
namely all insured claims incurred on or before the accounting date. The accounting date may be 
any date selected for a statistical or financial reporting purpose. 
 
419

=== PDF PAGE 426 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
The valuation date is the date through which transactions are included in the data base used in the 
evaluation of the liability, regardless of when the analysis is performed. For a defined group of 
claims as of a given accounting date, reevaluation of the same liability may be made as of 
successive valuation dates. A valuation date may be prior to, coincident with or subsequent to the 
accounting date. 
 
The carried claims reserve is the amount shown in a published statement or in an internal 
statement of financial condition. 
 
An estimated claims reserve is the result of the application of a particular claims reserving 
evaluation procedure. An estimated claims reserve for a given accounting date likely will change 
from one valuation date to another. 
 
A division is often required between reserves for known claims and reserves for claims which 
have been incurred but not reported (IBNR). The reserve for known claims represents the amount, 
estimated as of the valuation date, that will be required for future payments on claims that already 
have been reported to the insurer. (The reserve for known claims is also sometimes referred to by 
other labels such as the reported reserve, the reserve for claims adjusted or in the process of 
adjustment, or the reserve for unpaid claims excluding IBNR.) The IBNR reserve represents the 
amount that must be provided for future payments on insured losses that have occurred but that 
have not been reported. 
 
The case reserve is defined as the sum of the values assigned to specific known claims whether 
determined by claims adjusters or set by formula. (The term case reserve is sometimes used in 
place of the reserve for known claims. However, as defined, the case reserve does not include the 
provision for future development on known claims.) Adjusters’ estimates are the aggregate of the 
estimates made by claims personnel for individual claims, based on the facts of the particular 
claims. Formula reserves are reserves established for groups of claims for which certain 
classifying information is provided. Formula reserving may be applied to individual claims or to 
aggregations of claims with similar characteristics through use of average claim values or factors 
applied to representative statistics (for example, premiums in force or earned premiums). 
 
Development is defined as the change between valuation dates in the observed values of certain 
fundamental quantities that may be used in the claims reserve estimation process. For example, 
the observed number of reported claims associated with losses occurring with a particular 
calendar period often will be seen to increase from one valuation date to the next until all claims 
have been reported. The pattern of accumulating claims represents the development of the 
number of claims. 
 
In a similar fashion the amount of claim payments for losses occurring within a specific calendar 
period also will be seen to increase at succeeding valuation dates. In this case the pattern of 
accumulating payments represents the development of claim costs and is usually referred to by 
the term paid development. The concept of development also applies to incurred losses. I
ncurred 
development is defined as the difference between estimates of incurred costs at two valuation 
dates for a defined group of claims. 
 
The provision for future development on known claims relates to incurred development on those 
claims reported to an insurer on or before a specific accounting date that are still open on that 
accounting date. Incurred development on such claims can be either increasing or decreasing. 
 
420

=== PDF PAGE 427 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
The reopened claims reserve is a provision for future payments on claims closed as of the 
accounting date that may be reopened due to circumstances not foreseen at the time the claims 
were closed. In some instances, post-closing payments or recoveries for claims not actually 
reopened may be included with the development on known claims. 
 
For many insurers a claim is considered to be reported when it is first recorded in the accounting 
records of the insurer. Conceptually, two elements form the IBNR reserve. The first of these 
elements is the provision for claims incurred but not reported, referred to as the “pure” IBNR . 
This provision results from the normal delay that occurs in reporting losses. The second element 
is the provision for claims in transit, which are incurred and reported but not recorded. This 
provision represents the additional time consumed by the insurer’s recording procedures. As a 
practical matter it is not always feasible to measure these two elements separately, but it is 
important to understand the effect reporting procedures can have on the amount of IBNR reserve. 
For some insurers claims in transit are considered known claims. The IBNR reserve must provide 
for the ultimate value of IBNR claims including the development which is expected to occur on 
these claims after reporting. 
 
Loss adjustment expenses include allocated loss adjustment expenses and unallocated loss 
adjustment expenses. Allocated loss adjustment expenses are those expenses, such as attorneys’ 
fees and other legal costs, that are incurred in connection with and are assigned to specific claims. 
Unallocated loss adjustment expenses are all other claim adjustment expenses and include 
salaries, utilities and rent apportioned to the claim adjustment function but not readily assignable 
to specific claims. The definition of allocated and unallocated loss adjustment expenses for 
reserving purposes varies among insurers, and an individual insurer’s practice for reserving may 
not always conform to its definition for statistical reporting or ratemaking purposes. 
 
Since allocated expenses are assigned to specific claims, all of the analyses performed on claims 
data can also be performed on allocated loss expense data. Thus, the allocated loss adjustment 
expense reserve can be divided into known and IBNR components. All of the concepts discussed 
in the preceding paragraphs, as well as each of the five elements of the claims reserve, have 
similar meanings with regard to the allocated loss adjustment expense reserve. 
 
Although the same statistical procedures normally do not apply to unallocated expenses, the 
unallocated loss adjustment expense reserve can still be divided into know reserve and IBNR 
components, and the concept of a particular valuation date is meaningful. 
 
 
II. Principles 
 
1) An actuarially sound claims reserve for a defined group of claims as of a given valuation 
date is a provision, based on estimates derived from reasonable assumptions and appropriate 
actuarial methods, for the unpaid amount required to settle all claims, whether reported or 
not, for which liability exists on a particular accounting date. 
 
2) An actuarially sound loss adjustment expense reserve for a defined group of claims as of a 
given valuation date is a provision, based on estimates derived from reasonable assumptions 
and appropriate actuarial methods, for the unpaid amount required to investigate, defend 
and effect the settlement of all claims, whether reported or not, for which loss adjustment 
expense liability exists on a particular accounting date. 
 
421

=== PDF PAGE 428 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
3) The uncertainty inherent in the estimation of required provisions for unpaid claims or loss 
adjustment expenses implies that a range of reserves can be actuarially sound. The true 
value of the liability for losses or loss adjustment expenses at any accounting date can be 
known only when all attendant claims have been settled. 
 
4) The most appropriate reserve within a range of actuarially sound estimates depends on both 
the relative likelihood of estimates within the range and the financial reporting context in 
which the reserve will be presented. 
 
Although specific reserve requirements may vary, the same basic principles apply in each context 
in which the reserves are stated, including statutory balance sheets, statements of opinion on 
claims reserves and reports to shareholders or securities regulators. Guidance in the application of 
these principles is provided in the Considerations section of this statement. 
 
 
III. Considerations 
 
Understanding the trends and changes affecting the data base is prerequisite of the application of 
actuarially sound reserving methods. A knowledge of changes in underwriting, claims handling, 
data processing and accounting, as well as changes in the legal and social environment, affecting 
the experience is essential to the accurate interpretation and evaluation of observed data and the 
choice of reserving methods. 
 
A knowledge of the general characteristics of the insurance portfolio for which reserves are to be 
established also is important. Such knowledge would include familiarity with policy provisions 
that may have a bearing on reserving, as well as deductibles, salvage and subrogation, policy 
limits and reinsurance. 
 
 
Data Organizations 
 
The categorization of claims by time unit is extremely important. The successful organization of a 
data base for reserving revolves around five key dates: 
 
 accident date, which is the date on which the loss occurred, or for those losses that cannot be 
identified with a single isolated event, the date on which the loss is deemed to have occurred 
 
 report date, which is the date on which the loss is first reported to the insurer (in practice it is 
often taken to be the recorded date) 
 
 recorded date, which is the date on which the loss is first entered in the statistical records of 
the insurer 
 
 accounting date 
 
 valuation date 
 
Commonly, insurers compile claim data by accident periods (accident year, accident quarter, 
accident month, etc.), which group together all claims with accident dates falling within particular 
fiscal periods; or by policy periods, which group all claims relating to policies written during 
422

=== PDF PAGE 429 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
particular fiscal periods. Claim information by accident year is required for various financial 
reporting schedules. Many insurers also compile claim data by report periods, which group 
together all claims with report dates failing within specified fiscal periods. 
 
Claims with report dates equal to or prior to a particular accounting date would be classified as 
known or reported claims with respect to the accounting date, but claims with report dates later 
than a particular accounting date and with accident dates equal to or earlier than the accounting 
date would be classified as IBNR with respect to the accounting date. 
 
The preceding paragraph gives the precise definition of IBNR claims. In practice a broader 
definition is sometimes used in which the IBNR reserve denotes the provision for late reported 
claims, development on known claims and a provision for reopened claims. 
 
The ambiguity regarding the definition of IBNR can result from the differing strategies insurers 
may employ in approaching claims reserving. The two common strategies are the report period 
approach and the accident period approach. In the report period approach the adequacy of 
existing reserves on reported claims is estimated on the basis of the historical results. Further 
analysis is required in order to measure the emergence of IBNR claims. In a pure accident period 
approach the ultimate cost of all claims, both reported and unreported, arising from each accident 
period is estimated. This approach results in an estimate of the claims reserve without segregation 
of claims incurred but not reported. The estimated claims reserve is then apportioned between 
reserves for IBNR and known claims on a suitable basis. Because accident period techniques do 
not necessarily require separate treatment of reported and unreported claims, their use can lead to 
a broader definition of IBNR as mentioned above. 
 
The method of assigning report dates to reopened claims can also affect the IBNR reserve. 
Because reopened claims are generated from claims previously reported and closed, there is 
general agreement that the provision for this liability should be included in the reserve for known 
claims. Some insurers, however, establish new report dates for reopened claims and thereby 
consider the provision for these claims as a component of the IBNR reserve. 
 
 
Homogeneity 
 
Claims reserving accuracy often is improved by subdividing experience into groups exhibiting 
similar characteristics, such as comparable claim experience patterns, settlement patterns or size 
of loss distributions. For a heterogeneous product, such as commercial multi-peril or 
miscellaneous liability insurance, consideration should be given to segregating the experience 
into more homogeneous groupings. Other example applications concern the distinctions between 
personal and commercial risks and between primary and excess coverage. Additionally, 
subdividing or combining the data so as to minimize the distorting effects of operational or 
procedural changes should be fully explored. 
 
 
Credibility 
 
Credibility is a measure of the predictive value that the actuary attaches to a body of data. The 
degree to which consideration is given to homogeneity is related to the consideration of 
credibility. Credibility is increased by making groupings more homogeneous or by increasing the 
number of claims analyzed within each group. A group of claims should be large enough to be 
statistically reliable. Obtaining homogeneous groupings requires refinement and partitioning of 
423

=== PDF PAGE 430 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
the total data. There is a point at which partitioning divides data into groups too small to provide 
credible development patterns. Each situation requires a balancing of the homogeneity and 
amount of data in each grouping. Thus, line and coverage definitions suitable for the 
establishment of reserves for large insurers can be in much finer detail than in the case of small 
insurers. Where a very small group of claims is involved, use of external information such as 
industry aggregates may be necessary. 
 
 
Data Availability 
 
Data should meet requirements for the proper evaluation of reserves. Existing information 
systems may impose constraints while more suitable data are being developed. Whatever data are 
used in analysis of reserves, they must reconcile to the insurer’s financial records. If reserves are 
established in less detail than necessary for reporting requirements, procedures for property 
assigning the reserves to required categories must be developed. 
 
 
Emergence Patterns 
 
The delay between the occurrence of claims and the recording of claims depends upon both the 
line of business and the insurer’s practices. In general, property claims are reported quickly, 
whereas the reporting of liability claims may be substantially delayed. 
 
A review of the insurer’s claims practices should be made to assure that assumptions regarding 
the claims process are appropriate. If a change in claims procedures is identified, its impact on 
emergence patterns should be evaluated. 
 
 
Settlement Patterns 
 
The length of time that it normally takes for reported claims to be settled will affect the choice of 
the claims reserving methods. Lines of business for which claims settle quickly generally are less 
subject to reserve uncertainty. A claim arising under collision coverage, for example, tends to be 
settled quickly, and the amount of settlement is usually close to the original estimate. Conversely, 
a bodily injury liability claim often requires a long time to settle. Moreover, the amount of 
settlement often varies considerably from the original estimate, since it depends on the interaction 
of complex variables such as the type and severity of the injury and the intricacies of the judicial 
process. 
 
 
Development Patterns 
 
The pattern of development on known claims should be carefully reviewed. An insurer’s claims 
procedures will affect the manner in which the case reserves develop for any group of claims, and 
changes in claims practices may affect the consistency of historical developments. Further, the 
length of time to settlement may affect the observed development. 
 
424

=== PDF PAGE 431 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
If reserves have been established at present values, the payments of claims, by themselves, cause 
an appearance of upward development apart from development due to other factors. To interpret 
development patterns correctly, the development history should be restated to remove the effect 
of discounting. 
 
 
Frequency and Severity 
 
The same total dollars of losses may arise from a few very large claims or from many small 
claims. Reserve estimates will tend to be more accurate for losses resulting from a high 
frequency/low severity group of claims than from a low frequency/high severity group of claims. 
Therefore, the evaluation of reserves for low frequency/high severity groups of claims will 
ordinarily require more extensive analysis. If the exposure for the group of claims being 
considered includes the potential for claims of a magnitude not present in historical data, 
adjustments should be made to reflect the expectation of such claims. 
 
 
Reopened Claims Potential 
 
The tendency for closed claims to reopen varies substantially among lines of business. Judicial 
opinions and legislation can affect the reporting of claims, as can changes in an insurer’s 
procedures. 
 
 
Claims-Made 
 
Some coverages may be provided on a policy form covering claims reported during a certain 
period rather than claims arising out of occurrences during that period. Claims-made data should 
be segregated from experience on occurrence policies. It may be necessary to augment claims-
made statistics with appropriate report period statistics generated under occurrence programs. 
 
Certain provisions may modify the claims-made policy upon fulfillment of conditions stipulated 
in the contract. Review of the contract wording is necessary to determine the appropriate reserve, 
if any, for occurrences prior to the policy effective date or claims reported after the policy 
expiration. 
 
 
Aggregate Limits 
 
For certain insurance coverages, such as products and professional liability, aggregate policy 
limits may act to restrict total potential incurred losses and therefore reserve requirements. In the 
review of groups of claims where aggregate limits apply, modeling techniques or audit tests of the 
data will reveal to what extent limit ceilings have been reached and assist in determining how 
reserve projections may have to be modified.  
 
 
425

=== PDF PAGE 432 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
Salvage, Subrogation, and Collateral Sources 
 
For a proper evaluation of an insurer’s total reserve position, the potential impact of salvage and 
subrogation on the group of claims under consideration should be evaluated even though statutory 
accounting may prohibit a deduction from claims reserves. In addition, the impact of coinsurance, 
deductibles, coordination of benefits, second injury fund recoveries, as well as any other 
collateral sources, should be considered. 
 
 
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
 
Reports to shareholders and to securities regulators are governed by generally accepted 
accounting principles (GAAP). GAAP reserves may be defined differently from statutory 
reserves. For example, GAAP reserves are ordinarily reduced by anticipated salvage and 
subrogation. The same principles of analysis used for statutory estimates can be applied to GAAP 
reserve estimates. 
 
 
Reinsurance 
 
Reserves are affected by the types of reinsurance plans and retentions that were and are in force, 
and the impact of changes in net retentions should be evaluated. To determine the effect of 
reinsurance it may be appropriate to analyze direct and ceded experience separately. The 
recoverability of ceded reinsurance is a further consideration; generally, it is addressed separately 
from the reserve evaluation process. 
 
 
Portfolio Transfers, Commutations and Structured Settlements 
 
Portfolio transfers, commutations and structured settlements generally recognize the time value of 
money. Such transactions should be evaluated for their impact on the claims reserves and the 
development patterns. 
 
 
Pools and Associations 
 
The loss liabilities of an insurer depend to some degree on forces beyond its control, such as 
business obtained through participation in voluntary and non-voluntary underwriting pools and 
associations. The operating and reserving policies of these organizations vary, and adjustments to 
reserves reported by the pools and associations may be warranted. 
 
 
Operational Changes 
 
The installation of a new computer system, an accounting change, a reorganization of claims 
responsibility or changes in claims handling practices or underwriting programs are examples of 
operational changes that can affect the continuity of the claims experience. The computation of 
the reserves should reflect the impact of such changes.  
 
 
426

=== PDF PAGE 433 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
Changes in Contracts 
 
Changes in contract provisions, such as policy limits, deductibles or coverage attachment points, 
may alter the amounts of claims against an insurer. Such contractual changes may affect both the 
frequency and severity of claims. 
 
 
External Influences 
 
Due regard should be given to the impact of external influences. External influences include the 
judicial environment, regulatory and legislative changes, residual or involuntary market 
mechanisms, and economic variables such as inflation.  
 
 
Discounting 
 
There are circumstances where claims reserves are stated on a present value basis. To calculate or 
evaluate such reserves, it is generally appropriate to perform an analysis on an undiscounted basis 
and then apply the effect of discounting. 
 
 
Provision for Uncertainty 
 
A reserve estimate should take into account the degree of uncertainty inherent in its projection. A 
reserve stated at its ultimate value may include an implicit provision for uncertainty due to the 
time value of money. If a reserve is to be stated at a present value, it may be appropriate to 
include an explicit provision for uncertainty in its undiscounted amount. Further, an explicit 
provision for uncertainty may be warranted when the estimated ultimate reserve value is subject 
to a high degree of variability. 
 
 
Reasonableness 
 
The incurred losses implied by the reserves should be measured for reasonableness against 
relevant indicators, such as premiums, exposures or numbers of policies, and expressed wherever 
possible in terms of frequencies, severities, and claim ratios. No material departure from expected 
results should be accepted without attempting to find an explanation for the variation. 
 
 
Loss-Related Balance Sheet Items 
 
The claims reserve analysis may have implications for other loss-related balance sheet items. 
These include contingent commissions, retrospective premium adjustments, policyholder 
dividends, premium deficiency reserves, minimum statutory reserves and the deduction for 
unauthorized reinsurance. 
 
 
427

=== PDF PAGE 434 ===
 
Appendix A 
 
 
Loss Reserving Methods 
 
Detailed discussion of the technology and applicability of current claims reserving practices is 
beyond the scope of this statement. Selection of the most appropriate method of reserve 
estimation is the responsibility of the actuary. Ordinarily the actuary will examine the indications 
of more than one method when estimating the loss and loss adjustment expense liability for a 
specific group of claims. 
 
 
Standards of Practice 
 
This statement provides the principles of claims reserving. The actuary should also be familiar 
with standards of practice, which address the application of these principles. 
 
 
428

=== PDF PAGE 435 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
APPENDIX B – ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 43 
PROPERTY/CASUALTY UNPAID CLAIM ESTIMATES 
 
 
In June 2007, the Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) adopted the Actuarial Standard of Practice 
No. 43 Property/Casualty Unpaid Claim Estimates (ASOP 43). Previously, no ASOP existed to 
provide guidance to actuaries developing property/casualty unpaid claim estimates. To address 
this issue, the ASB charged the Subcommittee on Reserving of the ASB Casualty Committee to 
create this ASOP. 
 
In this appendix, we include ASOP 43 in its entirety. We addressed many of the concepts 
included in ASOP 43 throughout this text.  
 
* * * * * 
 
Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 43 
Property/Casualty Unpaid Claim Estimates 
Standard of Practice 
 
 
Section 1.  Purpose, Scope, Cross References, and Effective Date 
 
1.1  Purpose
 – This actuarial standard of practice (ASOP) provides guidance to actuaries 
when performing professional services relating to the estimation of loss and loss 
adjustment expense for unpaid claims for property/casualty coverages. Any reference to 
“unpaid claims” in this standard includes (unless explicitly stated otherwise) the 
associated unpaid claim adjustment expense even when not accompanied by the 
estimation of unpaid claims. 
 
1.2  Scope
 – This standard applies to actuaries when performing professional services related 
to developing unpaid claim estimates only for events that have already occurred or will 
have occurred, as of an accounting date, exclusive of estimates developed solely for 
ratemaking purposes. This standard applies to the actuary when estimating unpaid claims 
for all classes of entities, including self-insureds, insurance companies, reinsurers, and 
governmental entities. This standard applies to estimates of gross amounts before 
recoverables (such as deductibles, ceded reinsurance, and salvage and subrogation), 
estimates of amounts after such recoverables, and estimates of amounts of such 
recoverables.  
 
This standard applies to the actuary only with respect to unpaid claim estimates that are 
communicated as an actuarial finding (as described in ASOP No. 41, Actuarial 
Communications) in written or electronic form. Actions taken by the actuary’s principal 
regarding such estimates are beyond the scope of this standard. 
 
The terms “reserves” and “reserving” are sometimes used to refer to “unpaid claim 
estimates” and “unpaid claim estimate analysis.” In this standard, the term “reserve” is 
limited to its strict definition as an amount booked in a financial statement. Services 
429

=== PDF PAGE 436 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
described above are covered by this standard, regardless as to whether the actuary refers 
to the work performed as “reserving,” “estimating unpaid claims” or any other term.   
This standard does not apply to the estimation of items that may be a function of unpaid 
claim estimates or claim outcomes, such as (but not limited to) loss-based taxes, 
contingent commissions and retrospectively rated premiums.   
 
This standard does not apply to unpaid claims under a “health benefit plan” covered by 
ASOP No. 5, Incurred Health and Disability Claims, or included as “health and disability 
liabilities” under ASOP No. 42, Determining Health And Disability Liabilities Other 
Than Liabilities for Incurred Claims. However, this standard does apply to health 
benefits associated with state or federal workers compensation statutes and liability 
policies.   
 
With respect to discounted unpaid claim estimates for property/casualty coverages, this 
standard addresses the determination of the undiscounted value of such estimates. The 
actuary should be guided by ASOP No. 20, Discounting of Property and Casualty Loss 
and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, to address additional considerations to reflect the 
effects of discounting.  
 
An actuary may develop an unpaid claim estimate in the context of issuing a written 
statement of actuarial opinion regarding property/casualty loss and loss adjustment 
expense reserves. This standard addresses the determination of the unpaid claim estimate. 
The actuary should be guided by ASOP No. 36, Statements of Actuarial Opinion 
Regarding Property/Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, to address 
additional considerations associated with the issuance of such a statement. 
 
The actuary should comply with this standard except to the extent it may conflict with 
applicable law (statutes, regulations, and other legally binding authority). If compliance 
with applicable law requires the actuary to depart from the guidance set forth in this 
standard, the actuary should refer to section 4.4 regarding deviation from standard. 
 
1.3 Cross References
 – When this standard refers to the provisions of other documents, the 
reference includes the referenced documents as they may be amended or restated in the 
future, and any successor to them, by whatever name called. If any amended or restated 
document differs materially from the originally referenced document, the actuary should 
consider the guidance in this standard to the extent it is applicable and appropriate. 
  
1.4 Effective Date
 – This standard will be effective for any actuarial work product covered 
by this standard’s scope produced on or after September 1, 2007.  
 
 
Section 2.  Definitions 
 
 The terms below are defined for use in this actuarial standard of practice.  
 
2.1 Actuarial Central Estimate
 – An estimate that represents an expected value over the range 
of reasonably possible outcomes.  
 
2.2 Claim Adjustment Expense  – The costs of administering, determining coverage for, 
settling, or defending claims even if it is ultimately determined that the claim is invalid.  
 
430

=== PDF PAGE 437 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
2.3 Coverage  – The terms and conditions of a plan or contract, or the requirements of 
applicable law, that create an obligation for claim payment associated with contingent 
events.  
 
2.4 Event
 – The incident or activity that triggers potential for claim or claim adjustment 
expense payment. 
 
2.5 Method
 – A systematic procedure for estimating the unpaid claims.  
 
2.6 Model  – A mathematical or empirical representation of a specified phenomenon.  
 
2.7 Model Risk  – The risk that the methods are not appropriate to the circumstances or the 
models are not representative of the specified phenomenon. 
 
2.8 Parameter Risk  – The risk that the parameters used in the methods or models are not 
representative of future outcomes.  
 
2.9 Principal  – The actuary’s client or employer. In situations where the actuary has both a 
client and an employer, as is common for consulting actuaries, the facts and 
circumstances will determine whether the client or the employer (or both) is the principal 
with respect to any portion of this standard. 
 
2.10 Process Risk
 – The risk associated with the projection of future contingencies that are 
inherently variable, even when the parameters are known with certainty.    
 
2.11 Unpaid Claim Estimate  – The actuary’s estimate of the obligation for future payment 
resulting from claims due to past events. 
 
2.12 Unpaid Claim Estimate Analysis  – The process of developing an unpaid claim estimate.  
 
 
Section 3.  Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 
3.1 Purpose or Use of the Unpaid Claim Estimate  – The actuary should identify the intended 
purpose or use of the unpaid claim estimate. Potential purposes or uses of unpaid claim 
estimates include, but are not limited to, establishing liability estimates for external 
financial reporting, internal management reporting, and various special purpose uses such 
as appraisal work and scenario analyses. Where multiple purposes or uses are intended, 
the actuary should consider the potential conflicts arising from those multiple purposes 
and uses and should consider adjustments to accommodate the multiple purposes to the 
extent that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, it is appropriate and practical to make 
such adjustments.   
 
3.2 Constraints on the Unpaid Claim Estimate Analysis  – Sometimes constraints exist in the 
performance of an actuarial analysis, such as those due to limited data, staff, time or other 
resources. Where, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary believes that such 
constraints create a significant risk that a more in-depth analysis would produce a 
materially different result, the actuary should notify the principal of that risk and 
communicate the constraints on the analysis to the principal.  
 
431

=== PDF PAGE 438 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
3.3 Scope of the Unpaid Claim Estimate  – The actuary should identify the following:  
 
a) the intended measure of the unpaid claim estimate; 
 
1) Examples of various types of measures for the unpaid claim estimate 
include, but are not limited to, high estimate, low estimate, median, mean, 
mode, actuarial central estimate, mean plus risk margin, actuarial central 
estimate plus risk margin, or specified percentile.  
 
As defined in section 2.1, the actuarial central estimate represents an 
expected value over the range of reasonably possible outcomes. Such range 
of reasonably possible outcomes may not include all conceivable outcomes, 
as, for example, it would not include conceivable extreme events where the 
contribution of such events to an expected value is not reliably estimable. 
An actuarial central estimate may or may not be the result of the use of a 
probability distribution or a statistical analysis. This description is intended 
to clarify the concept rather than assign a precise statistical measure, as 
commonly used actuarial methods typically do not result in a statistical 
mean.  
 
The terms “best estimate” and “actuarial estimate” are not sufficient 
identification of the intended measure, as they describe the source or the 
quality of the estimate but not the objective of the estimate. 
 
2) The actuary should consider whether the intended measure is appropriate to 
the intended purpose or use of the unpaid claim estimate.   
 
3) The description of the intended measure should include the identification of 
whether any amounts are discounted. 
 
b) whether the unpaid claim estimate is to be  gross or net of specified recoverables;  
 
c) whether and to what extent collectibility risk is to be considered when the unpaid 
claim estimate is affected by recoverables; 
 
d) the specific types of unpaid claim adjustment expenses covered in the unpaid 
claim estimate (for example, coverage dispute costs, defense costs, and adjusting 
costs);  
 
e) the claims to be covered by the unpaid claim estimate (for example, type of loss, 
line of business, year, and state); and  
 
f) any other items that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, are needed to 
describe the scope sufficiently.  
 
3.4 Materiality
 – The actuary may choose to disregard items that, in the actuary’s 
professional judgment, are not material to the unpaid claim estimate given the intended 
purpose and use. The actuary should evaluate materiality based on professional judgment, 
taking into account the requirements of applicable law and the intended purpose of the 
unpaid claim estimate.  
 
432

=== PDF PAGE 439 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
3.5 Nature of Unpaid Claims  – The actuary should have an understanding of the nature of the 
unpaid claims being estimated. This understanding should be based on what a qualified 
actuary in the same practice area could reasonably be expected to know or foresee as 
being relevant and material to the estimate at the time of the unpaid claim estimate 
analysis, given the same purpose, constraints, and scope. The actuary need not be familiar 
with every aspect of potential unpaid claims. 
 
Examples of aspects of the unpaid claims (including any material trends and issues 
associated with such elements) that may require an understanding include the following: 
 
a) coverage; 
 
b) conditions or circumstances that make a claim more or less likely or the cost 
more or less severe; 
 
c) the underlying claim adjustment process; and 
 
 d) potential recoverables. 
 
3.6 Unpaid Claim Estimate Analysis
 – The actuary should consider factors associated with 
the unpaid claim estimate analysis that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, are 
material and are reasonably foreseeable to the actuary at the time of estimation. The 
actuary is not expected to become an expert in every aspect of potential unpaid claims.  
 
The actuary should consider the following items when performing the unpaid claim 
estimate analysis:   
 
3.6.1 Methods and Models
 – The actuary should consider methods or models for 
estimating unpaid claims that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, are 
appropriate. The actuary should select specific methods or models, modify such 
methods or models, or develop new methods or models based on relevant factors 
including, but not limited to, the following: 
 
a) the nature of the claims and underlying exposures; 
b) the development characteristics associated with these claims; 
c) the characteristics of the available data;  
d) the applicability of various methods or models to the available data; and  
e) the reasonableness of the assumptions underlying each method or model.  
 
The actuary should consider whether a particular method or model is appropriate 
in light of the purpose, constraints, and scope of the assignment. For example, an 
unpaid claim estimate produced by a simple methodology may be appropriate for 
an immediate internal use. The same methodology may be inappropriate for 
external financial reporting purposes.  
 
The actuary should consider whether, in the actuary’s professional judgment, 
different methods or models should be used for different components of the 
unpaid claim estimate. For example, different coverages within a line of business 
may require different methods.  
 
433

=== PDF PAGE 440 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
The actuary should consider the use of multiple methods or models appropriate to 
the purpose, nature and scope of the assignment and the characteristics of the 
claims unless, in the actuary’s professional judgment, reliance upon a single 
method or model is reasonable given the circumstances. If for any material 
component of the unpaid claim estimate the actuary does not use multiple 
methods or models, the actuary should disclose and discuss the rationale for this 
decision in the actuarial communication. 
 
In the case when the unpaid claim estimate is an update to a previous estimate, 
the actuary may choose to use the same methods or models as were used in the 
prior unpaid claim estimate analysis, different methods or models, or a 
combination of both. The actuary should consider the appropriateness of the 
chosen methods or models, even when the decision is made not to change from 
the previously applied methods or models.  
 
3.6.2 Assumptions
 – The actuary should consider the reasonableness of the 
assumptions underlying each method or model used. Assumptions generally 
involve significant professional judgment as to the appropriateness of the 
methods and models used and the parameters underlying the application of such 
methods and models. Assumptions may be implicit or explicit and may involve 
interpreting past data or projecting future trends. The actuary should use 
assumptions that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, have no known 
significant bias to underestimation or overestimation of the identified intended 
measure and are not internally inconsistent. Note that bias with regard to an 
expected value estimate would not necessarily be bias with regard to a measure 
intended to be higher or lower than an expected value estimate. 
 
The actuary should consider the sensitivity of the unpaid claim estimates to 
reasonable alternative assumptions. When the actuary determines that the use of 
reasonable alternative assumptions would have a material effect on the unpaid 
claim estimates, the actuary should notify the principal and attempt to discuss the 
anticipated effect of this sensitivity on the analysis with the principal.  
 
When the principal is interested in the value of an unpaid claim estimate under a 
particular set of assumptions different from the actuary’s assumptions, the 
actuary may provide the principal with the results based on such assumptions, 
subject to appropriate disclosure.    
 
3.6.3 Data
 – The actuary should refer to ASOP No. 23, Data Quality, with respect to 
the selection of data to be used, relying on data supplied by others, reviewing 
data, and using data.  
 
3.6.4 Recoverables  – Where the unpaid claim estimate analysis encompasses multiple 
types of recoverables, the actuary should consider interaction among the different 
types of recoverables and should adjust the analysis to reflect that interaction in a 
manner that the actuary deems appropriate.  
 
3.6.5 Gross vs. Net
 – The scope of the unpaid claim estimate analysis may require 
estimates both gross and net of recoverables. Gross and net estimates may be 
viewed as having three components, which are the gross estimate, the estimated 
recoverables, and the net estimate. The actuary should consider the particular 
434

=== PDF PAGE 441 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
facts and circumstances of the assignment when choosing which components to 
estimate.  
 
3.6.6 External Conditions  – Claim obligations are influenced by external conditions, 
such as potential economic changes, regulatory actions, judicial decisions, or 
political or social forces. The actuary should consider relevant external 
conditions that are generally known by qualified actuaries in the same practice 
area and that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, are likely to have a material 
effect on the actuary’s unpaid claim estimate analysis. However, the actuary is 
not required to have detailed knowledge of or consider all possible external 
conditions that may affect the future claim payments.  
 
3.6.7 Changing Conditions
 – The actuary should consider whether there have been 
significant changes in conditions, particularly with regard to claims, losses, or 
exposures, that are likely to be insufficiently reflected in the experience data or in 
the assumptions used to estimate the unpaid claims. Examples include 
reinsurance program changes and changes in the practices used by the entity’s 
claims personnel to the extent such changes are likely to have a material effect on 
the results of the actuary’s unpaid claim estimate analysis. Changing conditions 
can arise from circumstances particular to the entity or from external factors 
affecting others within an industry. When determining whether there have been 
known, significant changes in conditions, the actuary should consider obtaining 
supporting information from the principal or the principal’s duly authorized 
representative and may rely upon their representations unless, in the actuary’s 
professional judgment, they appear to be unreasonable.  
 
3.6.8  Uncertainty
 – The actuary should consider the uncertainty associated with the 
unpaid claim estimate analysis. This standard does not require or prohibit the 
actuary from measuring this uncertainty. The actuary should consider the purpose 
and use of the unpaid claim estimate in deciding whether or not to measure this 
uncertainty. When the actuary is measuring uncertainty, the actuary should 
consider the types and sources of uncertainty being measured and choose the 
methods, models, and assumptions that are appropriate for the measurement of 
such uncertainty. For example, when measuring the variability of an unpaid 
claim estimate covering multiple components, consideration should be given to 
whether the components are independent of each other or whether they are 
correlated. Such types and sources of uncertainty surrounding unpaid claim 
estimates may include uncertainty due to model risk, parameter risk, and process 
risk.  
 
3.7 Unpaid Claim Estimate
 – The actuary should take into account the following with respect 
to the unpaid claim estimate: 
 
3.7.1 Reasonableness  – The actuary should assess the reasonableness of the unpaid 
claim estimate, using appropriate indicators or tests that, in the actuary’s 
professional judgment, provide a validation that the unpaid claim estimate is 
reasonable. The reasonableness of an unpaid claim estimate should be 
determined based on facts known to, and circumstances known to or reasonably 
foreseeable by, the actuary at the time of estimation.  
 
435

=== PDF PAGE 442 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
3.7.2 Multiple Components  – When the actuary’s unpaid claim estimate comprises 
multiple components, the actuary should consider whether, in the actuary’s 
professional judgment, the estimates of the multiple components are reasonably 
consistent. 
 
 3.7.3 Presentation  – The actuary may present the unpaid claim estimate in a variety of 
ways, such as a point estimate, a range of estimates, a point estimate with a 
margin for adverse deviation, or a probability distribution of the unpaid claim 
amount. The actuary should consider the intended purpose or use of the unpaid 
claim estimate when deciding how to present the unpaid claim estimate.  
  
3.8 Documentation
 – The actuary should consider the intended purpose or use of the unpaid 
claim estimate when documenting work, and should refer to ASOP No. 41. 
 
 
Section 4.  Communications and Disclosures 
 
4.1 Actuarial Communication
 – When issuing an actuarial communication subject to this 
standard, the actuary should consider the intended purpose or use of the unpaid claim 
estimate and refer to ASOP Nos. 23 and 41.  
 
In addition, consistent with the intended purpose or use, the actuary should disclose the 
following in an appropriate actuarial communication: 
 
a) the intended purpose(s) or use(s) of the unpaid claim estimate, including adjustments 
that the actuary considered appropriate in order to produce a single work product for 
multiple purposes or uses, if any, as described in section 3.1; 
 
b) significant limitations, if any, which constrained the actuary’s unpaid claim estimate 
analysis such that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, there is a significant risk 
that a more in-depth analysis would produce a materially different result, as described 
in section 3.2; 
 
c) the scope of the unpaid claim estimate, as described in section 3.3; 
 
d) the following dates:  (1) the accounting date of the unpaid claim estimate, which is 
the date used to separate paid versus unpaid claim amounts; (2) the valuation date of 
the unpaid claim estimate, which is the date through which transactions are included 
in the data used in the unpaid claim estimate analysis; and (3) the review date of the 
unpaid claim estimate, which is the cutoff date for including information known to 
the actuary in the unpaid claim estimate analysis, if appropriate. An example of such 
communication is as follows:  “This unpaid claim estimate as of December 31, 2005 
was based on data evaluated as of November 30, 2005 and additional information 
provided to me through January 17, 2006.”; 
 
e) specific significant risks and uncertainties, if any, with respect to whether actual 
results may vary from the unpaid claim estimate; and 
 
436

=== PDF PAGE 443 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
f) significant events, assumptions, or reliances, if any, underlying the unpaid claim 
estimate that, in the actuary’s professional judgment, have a material effect on the 
unpaid claim estimate, including assumptions provided by the actuary’s principal or 
an outside party or assumptions regarding the accounting basis or application of an 
accounting rule. If the actuary depends upon a material assumption, method, or 
model that the actuary does not believe is reasonable or cannot determine to be 
reasonable, the actuary should disclose the dependency of the estimate on that 
assumption/method/model and the source of that assumption/method/model. The 
actuary should use professional judgment to determine whether further disclosure 
would be appropriate in light of the purpose of the assignment and the intended users 
of the actuarial communication. 
 
4.2 Additional Disclosures
 – In certain cases, consistent with the intended purpose or use, the 
actuary may need to make the following disclosures in addition to those in section 4.1:  
 
a) In the case when the actuary specifies a range of estimates, the actuary should 
disclose the basis of the range provided, for example, a range of estimates of the 
intended measure (each of such estimates considered to be a reasonable estimate on a 
stand-alone basis); a range representing a confidence interval within the range of 
outcomes produced by a particular model or models; or a range representing a 
confidence interval reflecting certain risks, such as process risk and parameter risk.    
 
b) In the case when the unpaid claim estimate is an update of a previous estimate, the 
actuary should disclose changes in assumptions, procedures, methods or models that 
the actuary believes to have a material impact on the unpaid claim estimate and the 
reasons for such changes to the extent known by the actuary. This standard does not 
require the actuary to measure or quantify the impact of such changes.   
 
4.3 Prescribed Statement of Actuarial Opinion
 – This ASOP does not require a prescribed 
statement of actuarial opinion as described in the Qualification Standards for Prescribed 
Statements of Actuarial Opinion promulgated by the American Academy of Actuaries. 
However, law, regulation, or accounting requirements may also apply to an actuarial 
communication prepared under this standard, and as a result, such actuarial 
communication may be a prescribed statement of actuarial opinion.  
 
4.4 Deviation from Standard
 – If, in the actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary has 
deviated materially from the guidance set forth elsewhere in this standard, the actuary can 
still comply with this standard by applying the following sections as appropriate: 
 
4.4.1 Material Deviations to Comply with Applicable Law – If compliance with 
applicable law requires the actuary to deviate materially from the guidance set 
forth in this standard, the actuary should disclose that the assignment was 
prepared in compliance with applicable law, and the actuary should disclose the 
specific purpose of the assignment and indicate that the work product may not be 
appropriate for other purposes. The actuary should use professional judgment to 
determine whether additional disclosure would be appropriate in light of the 
purpose of the assignment and the intended users of the actuarial communication. 
 
4.4.2  Other Material Deviations
 – The actuary’s communication should disclose any 
other material deviation from the guidance set forth in this standard. The actuary 
should consider whether, in the actuary’s professional judgment, it would be 
437

=== PDF PAGE 444 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
appropriate and practical to provide the reasons for, or to quantify the expected 
impact of, such deviation. The actuary should be prepared to explain the 
deviation to a principal, another actuary, or other intended users of the actuary’s 
communication. The actuary should also be prepared to justify the deviation to 
the actuarial profession’s disciplinary bodies. 
 
 
Appendix 1 – Background and Current Practices 
 
Note:  This appendix is provided for informational purposes but is not part of the standard of 
practice. 
 
 
Background 
 
This standard defines issues and considerations that an actuary should take into account when 
estimating unpaid claim and claim adjustment expense for property and casualty coverages or 
hazard risks. The Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss and Loss 
Adjustment Expense Reserves was adopted by the Board of Directors of the Casualty Actuarial 
Society in May 1988. The Statement of Principles has served as the primary guidance regarding 
estimation of unpaid property and casualty claim and claim adjustment expense amounts 
providing both principles and considerations related to practice. In conjunction with the 
development of this standard, the Statement of Principles is undergoing revision to focus on 
principles rather than also discussing considerations. 
 
A decision was made to exclude unpaid claim estimates developed for ratemaking purposes from 
the scope of this standard. This was done to avoid placing inappropriate requirements on unpaid 
claim estimates in the ratemaking context, and to keep the scope workable by excluding 
additional considerations only applicable to the ratemaking context. Ratemaking requires more of 
a hypothetical analysis of possible future events than an analysis of the cost of past events. Hence, 
the selection and evaluation of assumptions and methods for ratemaking purposes may be 
different from the selection and evaluation of such for past event unpaid claim estimates. 
 
 
Current Practices 
 
Actuaries are guided by the Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Liability Loss and 
Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves of the Casualty Actuarial Society. Other ASOPs issued by the 
Actuarial Standards Board pertaining to claim and claim adjustment expense estimates have 
included ASOP No. 9, Documentation and Disclosure in Property and Casualty Insurance 
Ratemaking, Loss Reserving, and Valuations; ASOP No. 20, Discounting of Property and 
Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves; ASOP No. 23, Data Quality; ASOP No. 
36, Statement of Opinion Regarding Property/Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense 
Reserves, and ASOP No. 41, Actuarial Communications. In addition, since 1993, the Casualty 
Practice Council of American Academy of Actuaries has published practice notes addressing 
current National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ requirements for the statement of 
actuarial opinion. The practice notes describe some current practices and show illustrative 
wording for handling issues and problems. While these practice notes (and future practice notes 
issued after the effective date of this standard) can be updated to react in a timely manner to new 
concerns or requirements, they are not binding, and they have not gone through the exposure and 
438

=== PDF PAGE 445 ===
 
Appendix B 
 
 
adoption process of the standards of actuarial practice promulgated by the Actuarial Standards 
Board. 
 
There are also numerous educational papers in the public domain relevant to the topic of unpaid 
claim estimates, including those published by the Casualty Actuarial Society. Some of these are 
refereed and others are not. While these may provide useful educational guidance to practicing 
actuaries, none is an actuarial standard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
439

=== PDF PAGE 446 ===
 
Appendix C 
 
 
APPENDIX C – ACTUARIAL STANDARD OF PRACTICE NO. 9 
DOCUMENTATION AND DISCLOSURE IN PROPERTY AND 
CASUALTY INSURANCE RATEMAKING, LOSS RESERVING, 
AND VALUATIONS 
 
 
The Actuarial Standards Board (ASB) adopted Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 9 
Documentation and Disclosure in Property and Casualty Insurance Ratemaking, Loss Reserving, 
and Valuations (ASOP 9) in January 1991 as developed by the Casualty Committee of the ASB. 
 
In this appendix we include only Sections 1 through 6 of ASOP 9. ASOP 9 also includes three 
appendices which are the Statements of Principles for ratemaking, claims reserving, and 
valuation. The Statement of Principles related to claims reserving is contained in Appendix A of 
this text. 
 
* * * * * 
 
Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 9 
Documentation and Disclosure in Property and Casualty  
Insurance Ratemaking, Loss Reserving, and Valuations 
Preamble 
 
 
Section 1 – Purpose, Scope, and Effective Date 
 
1.1 Purpose
 – The purpose of this standard of practice is to define the documentation and 
disclosure required of an actuary in property and casualty insurance ratemaking, claims 
reserving, and valuations. 
 
1.2 Scope
 – This standard of practice is limited to the practices that relate to the Statement of 
Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Insurance Ratemaking, the Statement of 
Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense 
Reserves, and the Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Valuations 
as adopted by the Casualty Actuarial Society (CAS). 
 
1.3 Effective Date
 – This standard became effective July 14, 1989, for documentation and 
disclosure in ratemaking and claims reserving. Its effective date for valuations was May 
1, 1991. 
 
 
Section 2 
– Definitions 
 
2.1 Actuarial Report  – A document, or other presentation, prepared as a formal means of 
conveying the actuary’s professional conclusions and recommendations, of recording and 
communicating the methods and procedures, and of ensuring that the parties addressed 
are aware of the significance of the actuary’s opinion or findings. 
 
440

=== PDF PAGE 447 ===
 
Appendix C 
 
 
2.2 Actuarial Work Product  – The result of an actuary’s work. The term applies to the 
following actuarial communications, whether written or oral: statements of actuarial 
opinion, actuarial reports, statements of actuarial review, and required actuarial 
documents. 
 
2.3 Required Actuarial Document
 – An actuarial communication of which the formal content 
is prescribed by law or regulation. 
 
2.4 Statement of Actuarial Opinion
 – A formal statement of the actuary’s professional 
opinion on a defined subject. It outlines the scope of the work but normally does not 
include descriptive details. 
 
2.5 Statement of Actuarial Review
 – A formally communicated appraisal of actuarial work 
done by another person. 
 
 
Section 3 – Background and Historical Issues 
 
Professional documentation and communication are essential components of actuarial practice. 
In the absence of specific standards of practice, the amount of documentation and disclosure has 
varied. As the nature of casualty actuarial work has become more complex and more open to and 
available for public review, the need to formalize standards has increased. The CAS has adopted 
a Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Insurance Ratemaking, a Statement 
of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, and 
a Statement of Principles Regarding Property and Casualty Valuations. Those statements serve 
as guides to this standard. This standard states that the methodology and material assumptions 
utilized in ratemaking, reserving, and valuations should be documented and, in some cases, 
available for disclosure. 
 
This standard addresses the following issues: 
 
 the extent to which an actuarial work product should be documented 
 the persons to whom that documentation should be available 
 the extent to which deviations from standards of practice should be documented 
 the requirement that actuaries sign work products within their responsibility 
 the requirement that actuaries disclose the names of others upon whose work they have relied 
 
 
Section 4 – Current Practices and Alternatives 
 
Current practices have been governed by the Guides and Interpretative Opinions as to 
Professional Conduct promulgated by the American Academy of Actuaries, the CAS, the 
Conference of Actuaries in Public Practice, and the Society of Actuaries. Current practices have 
varied with individual interpretations of those Guides and Opinions. 
 
 
441

=== PDF PAGE 448 ===
 
Appendix C 
 
 
Section 5 – Analysis of Issues and Recommended Practices 
 
5.1 Introduction  – Ratemaking, claims reserving, and valuations take place in a variety of 
settings depending upon the legal and regulatory environment involved. The form and 
content of any actuarial communication should meet the needs of the particular 
circumstances, taking into account the knowledge and understanding of the users and the 
actuary’s relationship to the users. Users may be either direct or indirect. A client or 
employer is the direct user of the actuary’s service, as distinguished from an indirect user. 
The direct user selects the actuary and communicates directly with the actuary about 
qualifications, work, and recommendations. 
 
5.2 Extent of Documentation
 – This standard requires documentation of an actuarial work 
product whether or not there is a legal or regulatory requirement for the documentation. 
Appropriate records, worksheets, and other documentation of the actuary’s work should 
be maintained by the actuary and retained for a reasonable period of time. Documentation 
should be sufficient for another actuary practicing in the same field to evaluate the work. 
The documentation should describe clearly the sources of data, material assumptions, and 
methods. Any material changes in sources of data, assumptions, or methods from the last 
analysis should be documented. The actuary should explain the reason(s) for and describe 
the impact of the changes. 
 
5.3 Prevention of Misuse
 – Information prepared by an actuary may be used by another 
person in a way that may influence the actions of a third-party. If someone other than an 
actuary might convey such information to any such indirect users, the actuary should 
recognize the risk of misquotation, misinterpretation, or other misuse of its actuarial 
aspects. The actuary should take reasonable steps to ensure that an actuarial work product 
is presented fairly, that the presentation as a whole is clear in its actuarial aspects, and 
that the actuary is identified as the source of the actuarial aspects and as the individual 
who is available to answer questions. An actuarial report is customarily considered to be 
presented fairly if it describes the data, material assumptions, methods, and material 
changes in these with sufficient clarity that another actuary practicing in the same field 
could make an appraisal of the reasonableness and validity of the report. 
 
5.4 Disclosure of Conflict with Professional Judgment, and of Advocacy
 – If the service 
requested by a client or employer produces a result that conflicts materially with the 
actuary’s professional judgment, the actuary should advise the client or employer of the 
conflict and should include appropriate qualifications or disclosures in any related 
actuarial communication. When an actuary acts, or may seem to be acting, as advocate 
for a client or employer, the nature of that relationship should be disclosed to directly 
interested parties. 
 
5.5 Availability of Documentation
 – Documentation should be available to the actuary’s 
client or employer, and it should be made available to other persons when the client or 
employer so requests, assuming appropriate compensation, and provided such availability 
is not otherwise improper. Ownership of documentation is normally established by the 
actuary and the client or employer, in accordance with law. 
 
442

=== PDF PAGE 449 ===
 
Appendix C 
 
 
5.6 Conflicting Interests  – The actuary does not normally have an obligation to communicate 
with any person other than the client or employer. If aware of any significant conflict 
between the interests of indirect users and the interests of the client or employer, the 
actuary should advise the client or employer of the conflict and should include 
appropriate qualifications or disclosures in any related actuarial communication.  
 
5.7 Signature on Work Product  – When required by law or regulation or when called upon by 
the client or employer to provide documentation of work, the actuary should provide such 
disclosure in writing. Any such disclosure must be signed with the name of the actuary 
responsible for the work. The name of an organization with which the actuary is affiliated 
may be incorporated into the signature. The actuary’s responsibilities to comply with this 
standard are not affected by the form of the signature. 
 
5.8 Reliance on Another
 – An actuary who makes an actuarial communication assumes 
responsibility for it, except to the extent the actuary disclaims responsibility by stating 
reliance on another person. Reliance on another person means using that person’s work 
without assuming responsibility therefor. A communication should define the extent of 
any such reliance. 
 
5.9 Waiver of Fee
 – The waiving of a fee for professional services, either partially or totally, 
does not relieve the actuary of the need to observe professional standards. 
 
 
Section 6 – Communications and Disclosures 
 
Deviation from Standard
 – An actuary who uses a procedure which differs from this standard 
must include, in the actuarial communication disclosing the result of the procedure, an 
appropriate and explicit statement with respect to the nature, rationale, and effect of such use. 
 
 
443

=== PDF PAGE 450 ===
Changes implemented on July 30, 2010 
 
1) Add chapter 17. 
2) Correct page number for chapter 11 in table of contents. 
 
 
 
Changes implemented on July 22, 2009 
 
1) Include hyperlinks (from the table of content) and bookmarks. 
2) Change the word “affect” to “effect” throughout the text where appropriate. 
3) (p.327-328) Chapter 13 Exhibit III Sheets 12-13 
a. Corrections to the projected ultimate claims for frequency-severity methods #1 
and #3. 
4) (p.344) Chapter 14 Exhibit II Sheet 3  
a. Change the word “no” to “on” for footnote (2). 
5) (p.355-359) Chapter 15 Exhibit I Sheets 2-5 
a. Corrections to the projected ultimate claims for frequency-severity method #3. 
 
444

=== PDF PAGE 451 ===
Errata 
The CAS online publication Estimating Unpaid Claims Using Basic Techniques by Jacqueline Frank 
Friedland contains an error. 
Chapter 17, page 388, under “Challenges of the Classical Technique,” 2nd paragraph. 
The original text below highlights the wording to be corrected: 
Some actuaries address this challenge by adjusting the percentages applied to the case 
outstanding and the IBNR to reflect their expectations for the particular company. For example, 
an actuary of an insurer with a portfolio of long-tail professional liability coverage, which is 
characterized by very long-tailed liabilities and substantial claims-handling work during the life of 
the claim, estimates unpaid ULAE assuming ratios of 25% applied to case outstanding and 75% to 
IBNR, which includes development on case outstanding. Thus, they assume a greater proportion 
of the expenses are related to closing the claims rather than opening claims. 
The corrected text is highlighted below and should read as follows: 
Some actuaries address this challenge by adjusting the percentages applied to the case 
outstanding and the IBNR to reflect their expectations for the particular company. For example, 
an actuary of an insurer with a portfolio of long-tail professional liability coverage, which is 
characterized by very long-tailed liabilities and substantial claims-handling work during the life of 
the claim, estimates unpaid ULAE assuming ratios of 25% applied to opening the claims and 75% 
to closing the claims (implying 75% of the ULAE ratio applied to case outstanding and 100% to 
IBNR, which includes development on case outstanding). Thus, they assume a greater proportion 
of the expenses are related to closing the claims rather than opening claims. 